<doc id="318779" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=318779" title="Embryophyte">
Embryophyte

The Embryophyta, or land plants, are the most familiar group of green plants that form vegetation on earth. Embryophyta is a clade within the Phragmoplastophyta, a larger clade that also includes several green algae groups (including the Charophyceae and Coleochaetales), and within this large clade the embryophytes are sister to the Zygnematophyceae/Mesotaeniaceae and consist of the bryophytes plus the polysporangiophytes. Living embryophytes therefore include hornworts, liverworts, mosses, ferns, lycophytes, gymnosperms and flowering plants. The Embryophyta are informally called land plants because they live primarily in terrestrial habitats, while the related green algae are primarily aquatic. Embryophytes are complex multicellular eukaryotes with specialized reproductive organs. The name derives from their innovative characteristic of nurturing the young embryo sporophyte during the early stages of its multicellular development within the tissues of the parent gametophyte. With very few exceptions, embryophytes obtain their energy by photosynthesis, that is by using the energy of sunlight to synthesize their food from carbon dioxide and water.

The evolutionary origins of the embryophytes are discussed further below, but they are believed to have evolved from within a group of complex green algae during the Paleozoic era (which started around ) probably from terrestrial unicellular charophytes, similar to extant Klebsormidiophyceae. Embryophytes are primarily adapted for life on land, although some are secondarily aquatic. Accordingly, they are often called "land plants" or "terrestrial plants".

On a microscopic level, the cells of embryophytes are broadly similar to those of green algae, but differ in that in cell division the daughter nuclei are separated by a phragmoplast. They are eukaryotic, with a cell wall composed of cellulose and plastids surrounded by two membranes. The latter include chloroplasts, which conduct photosynthesis and store food in the form of starch, and are characteristically pigmented with chlorophylls "a" and "b", generally giving them a bright green color. Embryophyte cells also generally have an enlarged central vacuole enclosed by a vacuolar membrane or tonoplast, which maintains cell turgor and keeps the plant rigid.

In common with all groups of multicellular algae they have a life cycle which involves 'alternation of generations'. A multicellular generation with a single set of chromosomes – the haploid gametophyte – produces sperm and eggs which fuse and grow into a multicellular generation with twice the number of chromosomes – the diploid sporophyte. The mature sporophyte produces haploid spores which grow into a gametophyte, thus completing the cycle. Embryophytes have two features related to their reproductive cycles which distinguish them from all other plant lineages. Firstly, their gametophytes produce sperm and eggs in multicellular structures (called 'antheridia' and 'archegonia'), and fertilization of the ovum takes place within the archegonium rather than in the external environment. Secondly, and most importantly, the initial stage of development of the fertilized egg (the zygote) into a diploid multicellular sporophyte, take place within the archegonium where it is both protected and provided with nutrition. This second feature is the origin of the term 'embryophyte' – the fertilized egg develops into a protected embryo, rather than dispersing as a single cell. In the bryophytes the sporophyte remains dependent on the gametophyte, while in all other embryophytes the sporophyte generation is dominant and capable of independent existence.

Embryophytes also differ from algae by having metamers. Metamers are repeated units of development, in which each unit derives from a single cell, but the resulting product tissue or part is largely the same for each cell. The whole organism is thus constructed from similar, repeating parts or "metamers". Accordingly, these plants are sometimes termed 'metaphytes' and classified as the group Metaphyta (but Haeckel's definition of Metaphyta places some algae in this group). In all land plants a disc-like structure called a phragmoplast forms where the cell will divide, a trait only found in the land plants in the streptophyte lineage, some species within their relatives Coleochaetales, Charales and Zygnematales, as well as within subaerial species of the algae order Trentepohliales, and appears to be essential in the adaptation towards a terrestrial life style.

All green algae and land plants are now known to form a single evolutionary lineage or clade, one name for which is Viridiplantae (i.e. 'green plants'). According to several molecular clock estimates the Viridiplantae split to into two clades: chlorophytes and streptophytes. The chlorophytes are considerably more diverse (with around 700 genera) and were originally marine, although some groups have since spread into fresh water. The streptophyte algae (i.e. the streptophyte clade minus the land plants) are less diverse (with around 122 genera) and adapted to fresh water very early in their evolutionary history. They have not spread into marine environments (only a few stoneworts, which belong to this group, tolerate brackish water). Some time during the Ordovician period (which started around ) one or more streptophytes invaded the land and began the evolution of the embryophyte land plants. Present day embryophytes form a monophyletic group called the hemitracheophytes.

Becker and Marin speculate that land plants evolved from streptophytes rather than any other group of algae because streptophytes were adapted to living in fresh water. This prepared them to tolerate a range of environmental conditions found on land. Fresh water living made them tolerant of exposure to rain; living in shallow pools required tolerance to temperature variation, high levels of ultra-violet light and seasonal dehydration.

Relationships between the groups making up Viridiplantae are still being elucidated. Views have changed considerably since 2000 and classifications have not yet caught up. However, the division between chlorophytes and streptophytes and the evolution of embryophytes from within the latter group, as shown in the cladogram below, are well established. Three approaches to classification are shown. Older classifications, as on the left, treated all green algae as a single division of the plant kingdom under the name Chlorophyta. Land plants were then placed in separate divisions. All the streptophyte algae can be grouped into one paraphyletic taxon, as in the middle, allowing the embryophytes to form a taxon at the same level. Alternatively, the embryophytes can be sunk into a monophyletic taxon comprising all the streptophytes, as shown below. A variety of names have been used for the different groups which result from these approaches; those used below are only one of a number of possibilities. The higher-level classification of the Viridiplantae varies considerably, resulting in widely different ranks being assigned to the embryophytes, from kingdom to class.

The precise relationships within the streptophytes are less clear . The stoneworts (Charales) have traditionally been identified as closest to the embryophytes, but recent work suggests that either the Zygnematales or a clade consisting of the Zygnematales and the Coleochaetales may be the sister group to the land plants. That the Zygnematales (or Zygnematophyceae) are the closest algal relatives to land plants was underpinned by an exhaustive phylogenetic analysis (phylogenomics) performed in 2014, which is supported by both plastid genome phylogenies as well as plastid gene content and properties.

The preponderance of molecular evidence as of 2006 suggested that the groups making up the embryophytes are related as shown in the cladogram below (based on Qiu "et al." 2006 with additional names from Crane "et al." 2004).

Studies based on morphology rather than on genes and proteins have regularly reached different conclusions; for example that neither the monilophytes (ferns and horsetails) nor the gymnosperms are a natural or monophyletic group.

There is considerable variation in how these relationships are converted into a formal classification. Consider the angiosperms or flowering plants. Many botanists, following Lindley in 1830, have treated the angiosperms as a division. Palaeobotanists have usually followed Banks in treating the tracheophytes or vascular plants as a division, so that the angiosperms become a class or even a subclass. Two very different systems are shown below. The classification on the left is a traditional one, in which ten living groups are treated as separate divisions; the classification on the right (based on Kenrick and Crane's 1997 treatment) sharply reduces the rank of groups such as the flowering plants. (More complex classifications are needed if extinct plants are included.)

An updated phylogeny of Embryophyta based on the work by Novíkov & Barabaš-Krasni 2015 with plant taxon authors from Anderson, Anderson & Cleal 2007 and some clade names from Pelletier 2012 and others. Puttick et al./Nishiyama et al are used for the basal clades.

Bryophytes consist of all non-vascular land plants (embryophytes without vascular tissue). All are relatively small and are usually confined to environments that are humid or at least seasonally moist. They are limited by their reliance on water needed to disperse their gametes, although only a few bryophytes are truly aquatic. Most species are tropical, but there are many arctic species as well. They may locally dominate the ground cover in tundra and Arctic–alpine habitats or the epiphyte flora in rain forest habitats.

The three living divisions are the mosses (Bryophyta), hornworts (Anthocerotophyta), and liverworts (Marchantiophyta). Originally, these three groups were included together as classes within the single division Bryophyta. However, they are now usually placed separately into three divisions since the bryophytes as a whole are thought to be a paraphyletic (artificial) group instead of a single lineage. The three bryophyte groups form an evolutionary grade of those land plants that are not vascular. Some closely related green algae are also non-vascular, but are not considered "land plants".


Regardless of their evolutionary origins, the bryophytes are usually studied together because of their many biological similarities as non-vascular land plants. All three bryophyte groups share a haploid-dominant (gametophyte) life cycle and unbranched sporophytes (the plant's diploid structure). These are traits that appear to be plesiotypic within the land plants, and thus were common to all early diverging lineages of plants on the land. The fact that the bryophytes have a life cycle in common may thus be an artefact of being the oldest extant lineages of land plant, and not the result of close shared ancestry. (See the phylogeny above.)

The bryophyte life-cycle is strongly dominated by the haploid gametophyte generation. The sporophyte remains small and dependent on the parent gametophyte for its entire brief life. All other living groups of land plants have a life cycle dominated by the diploid sporophyte generation. It is in the diploid sporophyte that vascular tissue develops. Although some mosses have quite complex water-conducting vessels, bryophytes lack true vascular tissue.

Like the vascular plants, bryophytes do have differentiated stems, and although these are most often no more than a few centimeters tall, they do provide mechanical support. Most bryophytes also have leaves, although these typically are one cell thick and lack veins. Unlike the vascular plants, bryophytes lack true roots or any deep anchoring structures. Some species do grow a filamentous network of horizontal stems, but these have a primary function of mechanical attachment rather than extraction of soil nutrients (Palaeos 2008).

During the Silurian and Devonian periods (around ), plants evolved which possessed true vascular tissue, including cells with walls strengthened by lignin (tracheids). Some extinct early plants appear to be between the grade of organization of bryophytes and that of true vascular plants (eutracheophytes). Genera such as "Horneophyton" have water-conducting tissue more like that of mosses, but a different life-cycle in which the sporophyte is more developed than the gametophyte. Genera such as "Rhynia" have a similar life-cycle but have simple tracheids and so are a kind of vascular plant. It was assumed that the gametophyte dominant phase seen in bryophytes used to be the ancestral condition in terrestrial plants, and that the sporophyte dominant stage in vascular plants was a derived trait. But research point out the possibility that both the gametophyte and sporophyte stage were equally independent from each other, and that the mosses and vascular plants in that case are both derived, and has evolved in the opposite direction from the other.

During the Devonian period, vascular plants diversified and spread to many different land environments. In addition to vascular tissues which transport water throughout the body, tracheophytes have an outer layer or cuticle that resists drying out. The sporophyte is the dominant generation, and in modern species develops leaves, stems and roots, while the gametophyte remains very small.

All the vascular plants which disperse through spores were once thought to be related (and were often grouped as 'ferns and allies'). However, recent research suggests that leaves evolved quite separately in two different lineages. The lycophytes or lycopodiophytes – modern clubmosses, spikemosses and quillworts – make up less than 1% of living vascular plants. They have small leaves, often called 'microphylls' or 'lycophylls', which are borne all along the stems in the clubmosses and spikemosses, and which effectively grow from the base, via an intercalary meristem. It is believed that microphylls evolved from outgrowths on stems, such as spines, which later acquired veins (vascular traces).

Although the living lycophytes are all relatively small and inconspicuous plants, more common in the moist tropics than in temperate regions, during the Carboniferous period tree-like lycophytes (such as "Lepidodendron") formed huge forests that dominated the landscape.

The euphyllophytes, making up more than 99% of living vascular plant species, have large 'true' leaves (megaphylls), which effectively grow from the sides or the apex, via marginal or apical meristems. One theory is that megaphylls developed from three-dimensional branching systems by first " – flattening to produce a two dimensional branched structure – and then 'webbing' – tissue growing out between the flattened branches. Others have questioned whether megaphylls developed in the same way in different groups.

Euphyllophytes are divided into two lineages: the ferns and horsetails (monilophytes) and the seed plants (spermatophytes). Like all the preceding groups, the monilophytes continue to use spores as their main method of dispersal. Traditionally, whisk ferns and horsetails were treated as distinct from 'true' ferns. Recent research suggests that they all belong together, although there are differences of opinion on the exact classification to be used. Living whisk ferns and horsetails do not have the large leaves (megaphylls) which would be expected of euphyllophytes. However, this has probably resulted from reduction, as evidenced by early fossil horsetails, in which the leaves are broad with branching veins.

Ferns are a large and diverse group, with some 12,000 species. A stereotypical fern has broad, much divided leaves, which grow by unrolling.

Seed plants, which first appeared in the fossil record towards the end of the Paleozoic era, reproduce using desiccation-resistant capsules called seeds. Starting from a plant which disperses by spores, highly complex changes are needed to produce seeds. The sporophyte has two kinds of spore-forming organs (sporangia). One kind, the megasporangium, produces only a single large spore (a megaspore). This sporangium is surrounded by one or more sheathing layers (integuments) which form the seed coat. Within the seed coat, the megaspore develops into a tiny gametophyte, which in turn produces one or more egg cells. Before fertilization, the sporangium and its contents plus its coat is called an 'ovule'; after fertilization a 'seed'. In parallel to these developments, the other kind of sporangium, the microsporangium, produces microspores. A tiny gametophyte develops inside the wall of a microspore, producing a pollen grain. Pollen grains can be physically transferred between plants by the wind or animals, most commonly insects. Pollen grains can also transfer to an ovule of the same plant, either with the same flower or between two flowers of the same plant (self-fertilization). When a pollen grain reaches an ovule, it enters via a microscopic gap in the coat (the micropyle). The tiny gametophyte inside the pollen grain then produces sperm cells which move to the egg cell and fertilize it.
Seed plants include two groups with living members, the gymnosperms and the angiosperms or flowering plants. In gymnosperms, the ovules or seeds are not further enclosed. In angiosperms, they are enclosed in ovaries. A split ovary with a visible seed can be seen in the adjacent image. Angiosperms typically also have other, secondary structures, such as petals, which together form a flower.

Extant seed plants are divided into five groups:


</doc>
<doc id="70382" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=70382" title="Blossom">
Blossom

In botany, blossoms are the flowers of stone fruit trees (genus "Prunus") and of some other plants with a similar appearance that flower profusely for a period of time in spring.

Colloquially, flowers of orange are referred to as such as well. Peach blossoms (including nectarine), most cherry blossoms, and some almond blossoms are usually pink. Plum blossoms, apple blossoms, orange blossoms, some cherry blossoms, and most almond blossoms are white.

Blossoms provide pollen to pollinators such as bees, and initiate cross-pollination necessary for the trees to reproduce by producing fruit.

Blossom trees have a tendency to lose their flower petals in wind-blown cascades, often covering the surrounding ground in petals. This attribute tends to distinguish "blossom" trees from other flowering trees.

The ancient Phoenicians used almond blossoms with honey and urine as a tonic, and sprinkled them into stews and gruels to give muscular strength. Crushed petals were also used as a poultice on skin spots and mixed with banana oil, for dry skin and sunburn.

In herbalism the crab apple was used as treatment for boils, abscesses, splinters, wounds, coughs, colds and a host of other ailments ranging from acne to kidney ailments. Many dishes made with apples and apple blossom are of medieval origin. In the spring, monks and physicians would gather the blossoms and preserve them in vinegar for drawing poultices and for bee stings and other insect bites.

Descending from China and south east Asia, the earliest orange species moved westwards via the trade routes.

In 17th century Italy peach blossoms were made into a poultice for bruises, rashes, eczema, grazes and stings.

In ancient Greek medicine plum blossoms were used to treat bleeding gums, mouth ulcers and tighten loose teeth. Plum blossoms mixed with sage leaves and flowers were used in plum wine or plum brandy as a mouthwash to soothe sore throats and mouth ailments and sweeten bad breath.




</doc>
<doc id="39892795" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39892795" title="Biomass partitioning">
Biomass partitioning

Biomass partitioning is the process by which plants divide their energy amongst their parts. For example, there may be a tradeoff in proteins and carbohydrates allocated towards leaves for photosynthesis or to roots for the process of nutrient uptake. The study of biomass partitioning is important to crop growth. The percentages of partitioning can be determined with the equation formula_1
with "dW/dt" is the growth rate "(dW/dt)" and "P" are the rates of biomass partitioned and the respective partitioning factor for each plant organ "i".

Overall, nitrogen availability has a strong effect on partitioning, with plants growing in low-nitrogen areas partitioning most of their biomass to underground structures. Soil nitrogen availability is a strong determinant of biomass allocation. For example, in low productivity systems such as boreal forests, trees devote a large portion of their biomass to roots. But as the soil productivity begins to increase, biomass is primarily allocated to aboveground structures such as leaves and stems. As an overall pattern, the overall lengths of roots begin to decrease as nitrogen concentrations increase.

In addition to nitrogen as a factor of plant biomass partitioning, other environmental stressors such as water availability play a role. For example, plants that are growing in dry conditions often have a decreased total biomass production but they also contribute more of their biomass to the roots and develop a higher root:shoot. When plants allocate more of their biomass to their roots, they are able to enhance water absorption by tapping further down into the water table as well as extending further laterally with the aid of increased root hairs. But, when there is an extreme soil drought, there is not an increase in root:shoot biomass. This suggests that there is a limit to which plant biomass allocation responds to water stress and possibly other environmental factors as well. It is important for plants to be able to balance their absorption and utilization processes with differing water and nitrogen availabilities because they adjust their growth in order to accommodate the abundances of growth-limiting resources, such as water and nitrogen.



</doc>
<doc id="170736" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=170736" title="Understory">
Understory

In forestry and ecology, understory (or understorey, underbrush, undergrowth) comprises plant life growing beneath the forest canopy without penetrating it to any great extent, but above the forest floor. Only a small percentage of light penetrates the canopy so understory vegetation is generally shade tolerant. The understory typically consists of trees stunted through lack of light, other small trees with low light requirements, saplings, shrubs, vines and undergrowth. Small trees such as holly and dogwood are understory specialists.

In temperate deciduous forests, many understory plants start into growth earlier than the canopy trees to make use of the greater availability of light at this time of year. A gap in the canopy caused by the death of a tree stimulates the potential emergent trees into competitive growth as they grow upwards to fill the gap. These trees tend to have straight trunks and few lower branches. At the same time, the bushes, undergrowth and plant life on the forest floor become more dense. The understory experiences greater humidity than the canopy, and the shaded ground does not vary in temperature as much as open ground. This causes a proliferation of ferns, mosses and fungi and encourages nutrient recycling, which provides favorable habitats for many animals and plants.

The understory is the underlying layer of vegetation in a forest or wooded area, especially the trees and shrubs growing between the forest canopy and the forest floor. 
Plants in the understory comprise an assortment of seedlings and saplings of canopy trees together with specialist understory shrubs and herbs. Young canopy trees often persist in the understory for decades as suppressed juveniles until an opening in the forest overstory permits their growth into the canopy. In contrast understory shrubs complete their life cycles in the shade of the forest canopy. Some smaller tree species, such as dogwood and holly, rarely grow tall and generally are understory trees.

The canopy of a rainforest is typically about 10m (33ft) thick, and intercepts around 95% of the sunlight. The understory receive less intense light than plants in the canopy and such light as does penetrate is impoverished in wavelengths of light that are most effective for photosynthesis. Understory plants therefore must be shade tolerant—they must be able to photosynthesize adequately using such light as does reach their leaves. They often are able to use wavelengths that canopy plants cannot. In temperate deciduous forests towards the end of the leafless season, understory plants take advantage of the shelter of the still leafless canopy plants to "leaf out" before the canopy trees do. This is important because it provides the understory plants with a window in which to photosynthesize without the canopy shading them. This brief period (usually 1–2 weeks) is often a crucial period in which the plant can maintain a net positive carbon balance over the course of the year.

As a rule forest understories also experience higher humidity than exposed areas. The forest canopy reduces solar radiation, so the ground does not heat up or cool down as rapidly as open ground. Consequently, the understory dries out more slowly than more exposed areas do. The greater humidity encourages epiphytes such as ferns and mosses, and allows fungi and other decomposers to flourish. This drives nutrient cycling, and provides favorable microclimates for many animals and plants, such as the pygmy marmoset.


https://www.eolss.net/sample-chapters/C10/E5-03-01-08.pdf


</doc>
<doc id="66966" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66966" title="Vascular plant">
Vascular plant

Vascular plants (from Latin "vasculum": duct), also known as tracheophytes (from the equivalent Greek term "trachea"), form a large group of plants ( 308,312 accepted known species) that are defined as land plants that have lignified tissues (the xylem) for conducting water and minerals throughout the plant. They also have a specialized non-lignified tissue (the phloem) to conduct products of photosynthesis. Vascular plants include the clubmosses, horsetails, ferns, gymnosperms (including conifers) and angiosperms (flowering plants). Scientific names for the group include Tracheophyta, Tracheobionta and Equisetopsida "sensu lato". Some early land plants (the rhyniophytes) had less developed vascular tissue; the term eutracheophyte has been used for all other vascular plants.

Botanists define vascular plants by three primary characteristics:

Cavalier-Smith (1998) treated the Tracheophyta as a phylum or botanical division encompassing two of these characteristics defined by the Latin phrase "facies diploida xylem et phloem instructa" (diploid phase with xylem and phloem). 

One possible mechanism for the presumed evolution from emphasis on haploid generation to emphasis on diploid generation is the greater efficiency in spore dispersal with more complex diploid structures. Elaboration of the spore stalk enabled the production of more spores and the development of the ability to release them higher and to broadcast them farther. Such developments may include more photosynthetic area for the spore-bearing structure, the ability to grow independent roots, woody structure for support, and more branching.

A proposed phylogeny of the vascular plants after Kenrick and Crane 1997 is as follows, with modification to the gymnosperms from Christenhusz "et al." (2011a), Pteridophyta from Smith "et al." and lycophytes and ferns by Christenhusz "et al." (2011b) The cladogram distinguishes the rhyniophytes from the "true" tracheophytes, the eutracheophytes.

This phylogeny is supported by several molecular studies. Other researchers state that taking fossils into account leads to different conclusions, for example that the ferns (Pteridophyta) are not monophyletic.

Water and nutrients in the form of inorganic solutes are drawn up from the soil by the roots and transported throughout the plant by the xylem. Organic compounds such as sucrose produced by photosynthesis in leaves are distributed by the phloem sieve tube elements.

The xylem consists of vessels in flowering plants and tracheids in other vascular plants, which are dead hard-walled hollow cells arranged to form files of tubes that function in water transport. A tracheid cell wall usually contains the polymer lignin. The phloem however consists of living cells called sieve-tube members. Between the sieve-tube members are sieve plates, which have pores to allow molecules to pass through. Sieve-tube members lack such organs as nuclei or ribosomes, but cells next to them, the companion cells, function to keep the sieve-tube members alive.

The most abundant compound in all plants, as in all cellular organisms, is water which serves an important structural role and a vital role in plant metabolism. Transpiration is the main process of water movement within plant tissues. Water is constantly transpired from the plant through its stomata to the atmosphere and replaced by soil water taken up by the roots. The movement of water out of the leaf stomata creates a transpiration pull or tension in the water column in the xylem vessels or tracheids. The pull is the result of water surface tension within the cell walls of the mesophyll cells, from the surfaces of which evaporation takes place when the stomata are open. Hydrogen bonds exist between water molecules, causing them to line up; as the molecules at the top of the plant evaporate, each pulls the next one up to replace it, which in turn pulls on the next one in line. The draw of water upwards may be entirely passive and can be assisted by the movement of water into the roots via osmosis. Consequently, transpiration requires very little energy to be used by the plant. Transpiration assists the plant in absorbing nutrients from the soil as soluble salts.

Living root cells passively absorb water in the absence of transpiration pull via osmosis creating root pressure. It is possible for there to be no evapotranspiration and therefore no pull of water towards the shoots and leaves. This is usually due to high temperatures, high humidity, darkness or drought.

Xylem and phloem tissues are involved in the conduction processes within plants. Sugars are conducted throughout the plant in the phloem, water and other nutrients through the xylem. Conduction occurs from a source to a sink for each separate nutrient. Sugars are produced in the leaves (a source) by photosynthesis and transported to the growing shoots and roots (sinks) for use in growth, cellular respiration or storage. Minerals are absorbed in the roots (a source) and transported to the shoots to allow cell division and growth.




</doc>
<doc id="66719" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=66719" title="Evergreen">
Evergreen

In botany, an evergreen is a plant that has leaves throughout the year that are always green. This is true even if the plant retains its foliage only in warm climates, and contrasts with deciduous plants, which completely lose their foliage during the winter or dry season. 

There are many different kinds of evergreen plants, both trees and shrubs. Evergreens include:

The Latin binomial term "sempervirens", meaning "always green", refers to the evergreen nature of the plant, for instance

Leaf longevity in evergreen plants varies from a few months to several decades (over thirty years in the Great Basin Bristlecone Pine).

Japanese umbrella pine is unique in that it has its own family of which it is the only species.

Evergreen and deciduous species vary in a range of morphological and physiological characters. Generally, broad-leaved evergreen species have thicker leaves than deciduous species, with a larger volume of parenchyma and air spaces per unit leaf area. They have larger leaf biomass per unit leaf area, and hence a lower Specific leaf area. Construction costs do not differ between the groups. Evergreens have generally a larger fraction of total plant biomass present as leaves (LMF), but they often have a lower rate of photosynthesis.

Deciduous trees shed their leaves, usually as an adaptation to a cold or dry/wet season. Evergreen trees do lose leaves, but each tree loses its leaves gradually and not all at once. Most tropical rainforest plants are considered to be evergreens, replacing their leaves gradually throughout the year as the leaves age and fall, whereas species growing in seasonally arid climates may be either evergreen or deciduous. Most warm temperate climate plants are also evergreen. In cool temperate climates, fewer plants are evergreen, with a predominance of conifers, as few evergreen broadleaf plants can tolerate severe cold below about .

In areas where there is a reason for being deciduous, e.g. a cold season or dry season, being evergreen is usually an adaptation to low nutrient levels. Deciduous trees lose nutrients whenever they lose their leaves. In warmer areas, species such as some pines and cypresses grow on poor soils and disturbed ground. In "Rhododendron", a genus with many broadleaf evergreens, several species grow in mature forests but are usually found on highly acidic soil where the nutrients are less available to plants. In taiga or boreal forests, it is too cold for the organic matter in the soil to decay rapidly, so the nutrients in the soil are less easily available to plants, thus favouring evergreens.

In temperate climates, evergreens can reinforce their own survival; evergreen leaf and needle litter has a higher carbon-nitrogen ratio than deciduous leaf litter, contributing to a higher soil acidity and lower soil nitrogen content. These conditions favour the growth of more evergreens and make it more difficult for deciduous plants to persist. In addition, the shelter provided by existing evergreen plants can make it easier for younger evergreen plants to survive cold and/or drought.



</doc>
<doc id="14740927" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14740927" title="Euphyllophyte">
Euphyllophyte

The euphyllophytes are a clade of plants within the tracheophytes (the vascular plants). The group may be treated as an unranked clade, a division under the name Euphyllophyta or a subdivision under the name Euphyllophytina. The euphyllophytes are characterized by the possession of true leaves ("megaphylls"), and comprise one of two major lineages of extant vascular plants. As shown in the cladogram below, the euphyllophytes have a sister relationship to the lycopodiophytes or lycopsids. Unlike the lycopodiophytes, which consist of relatively few presently living or extant taxa, the euphyllophytes comprise the vast majority of vascular plant lineages that have evolved since both groups shared a common ancestor more than 400 million years ago. The euphyllophytes consist of two lineages, the spermatophytes or seed plants such as flowering plants (angiosperms) and gymnosperms (conifers and related groups), and the Polypodiophytes or ferns, as well as a number of extinct fossil groups. 

The division of the extant tracheophytes into three monophyletic lineages is supported in multiple molecular studies. Other researchers argue that phylogenies based solely on molecular data without the inclusion of carefully evaluated fossil data based on whole plant reconstructions, do not necessarily completely and accurately resolve the evolutionary history of groups like the euphyllophytes.

The following cladogram shows one view of the evolutionary relationships among the taxa described above.
An updated phylogeny of both living and extinct Euphyllophytes with plant taxon authors from Anderson, Anderson & Cleal 2007 and some clade names from Pelletier 2012.


</doc>
<doc id="25466113" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25466113" title="Cormophyte">
Cormophyte

Cormophytes (Cormophyta) are the "plants differentiated into roots, shoots and leaves, and well adapted for life on land, comprising pteridophytes and the Spermatophyta." 
These plants differ from thallophytes, whose body is referred to as the thallus, i.e. a simple body not differentiated into leaf and stem, as of lichens, multicellular algae and some liverworts.


</doc>
<doc id="52841665" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52841665" title="Thermophyte">
Thermophyte

Thermophyte (Greek "thérmos" = warmth, heat + "phyton" = plant) is a plant which is tolerant or thriving at high temperatures. These plants are categorized according to ecological valences at high temperatures, including biological extremely. Such plants included the hot-spring taxa also.
The most famous presdstavnici these ecological groups of plants are:



</doc>
<doc id="190996" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=190996" title="Lignin">
Lignin

Lignin is a class of complex organic polymers that form key structural materials in the support tissues of vascular plants and some algae. Lignins are particularly important in the formation of cell walls, especially in wood and bark, because they lend rigidity and do not rot easily. Chemically, lignins are cross-linked phenolic polymers.

Lignin was first mentioned in 1813 by the Swiss botanist A. P. de Candolle, who described it as a fibrous, tasteless material, insoluble in water and alcohol but soluble in weak alkaline solutions, and which can be precipitated from solution using acid. He named the substance “lignine”, which is derived from the Latin word "lignum", meaning wood. It is one of the most abundant organic polymers on Earth, exceeded only by cellulose. Lignin constitutes 30% of non-fossil organic carbon and 20 to 35% of the dry mass of wood. The Carboniferous Period (geology) is in part defined by the evolution of lignin.

The composition of lignin varies from species to species. An example of composition from an aspen sample is 63.4% carbon, 5.9% hydrogen, 0.7% ash (mineral components), and 30% oxygen (by difference), corresponding approximately to the formula (CHO).

As a biopolymer, lignin is unusual because of its heterogeneity and lack of a defined primary structure. Its most commonly noted function is the support through strengthening of wood (mainly composed of xylem cells and lignified sclerenchyma fibres) in vascular plants.

The lignols that crosslink are of three main types, all derived from phenylpropane: 4-hydroxy-3-methoxyphenylpropane, 3,5-dimethoxy-4-hydroxyphenylpropane, and 4-hydroxyphenylpropane. The former tends to be more prevalent in conifers and the latter in hardwoods.

Lignin is a cross-linked polymer with molecular masses in excess of 10,000 u. It is relatively hydrophobic and rich in aromatic subunits. The degree of polymerisation is difficult to measure, since the material is heterogeneous. Different types of lignin have been described depending on the means of isolation.
Three monolignol monomers are precursors, all of which are methoxylated to various degrees: "p"-coumaryl alcohol, coniferyl alcohol, and sinapyl alcohol. These lignols are incorporated into lignin in the form of the phenylpropanoids "p"-hydroxyphenyl (H), guaiacyl (G), and syringyl (S), respectively. Gymnosperms have a lignin that consists almost entirely of G with small quantities of H. That of dicotyledonous angiosperms is more often than not a mixture of G and S (with very little H), and monocotyledonous lignin is a mixture of all three. Many grasses have mostly G, while some palms have mainly S. All lignins contain small amounts of incomplete or modified monolignols, and other monomers are prominent in non-woody plants.

Lignin fills the spaces in the cell wall between cellulose, hemicellulose, and pectin components, especially in vascular and support tissues: xylem tracheids, vessel elements and sclereid cells. It is covalently linked to hemicellulose and therefore cross-links different plant polysaccharides, conferring mechanical strength to the cell wall and by extension the plant as a whole. It is particularly abundant in compression wood but scarce in tension wood, which are types of reaction wood.

Lignin plays a crucial part in conducting water in plant stems. The polysaccharide components of plant cell walls are highly hydrophilic and thus permeable to water, whereas lignin is more hydrophobic. The crosslinking of polysaccharides by lignin is an obstacle for water absorption to the cell wall. Thus, lignin makes it possible for the plant's vascular tissue to conduct water efficiently. Lignin is present in all vascular plants, but not in bryophytes, supporting the idea that the original function of lignin was restricted to water transport. However, it is present in red algae, which seems to suggest that the common ancestor of plants and red algae also synthesised lignin. This would suggest that its original function was structural; it plays this role in the red alga "Calliarthron", where it supports joints between calcified segments.
Another possibility is that the lignins in red algae and in plants are a result of convergent evolution and not of a common origin.

Global commercial production of lignin is a consequence of papermaking. In 1988, more than 220 million tons of paper were produced worldwide. Much of this paper was delignified; lignin comprises about 1/3 of the mass of lignocellulose, the precursor to paper. It can thus be seen that lignin is handled on a very large scale. Lignin is an impediment to papermaking as it is colored, it yellows in air, and its presence weakens the paper. Once separated from the cellulose, it is burned as fuel. Only a fraction is used in a wide range of low volume applications where the form but not the quality is important.

Mechanical, or high-yield pulp, which is used to make newsprint, still contains most of the lignin originally present in the wood. This lignin is responsible for newsprint's yellowing with age. High quality paper requires the removal of lignin from the pulp. These delignification processes are core technologies of the papermaking industry as well as the source of significant environmental concerns.

In sulfite pulping, lignin is removed from wood pulp as lignosulfonates, for which many applications have been proposed. They are used as dispersants, humectants, emulsion stabilizers, and sequestrants (water treatment). Lignosulfonate was also the first family of water reducers or superplasticizers to be added in the 1930s as admixture to fresh concrete in order to decrease the water-to-cement ("w/c") ratio, the main parameter controlling the concrete porosity, and thus its mechanical strength, its diffusivity and its hydraulic conductivity, all parameters essential for its durability. It has application in environmentally sustainable dust suppression agent for roads. Also, can be used in making of biodegradable plastic along with cellulose as an alternative to hydrocarbon made plastics if lignin extraction is achieved through a more environmentally viable process than generic plastic manufacturing. 

Lignin removed by the kraft process is usually burned for its fuel value, providing energy to power the mill. Two commercial processes exist to remove lignin from black liquor for higher value uses: LignoBoost (Sweden) and LignoForce (Canada). Higher quality lignin presents the potential to become a renewable source of aromatic compounds for the chemical industry, with an addressable market of more than $130bn.

Given that it is the most prevalent biopolymer after cellulose, lignin has been investigated as a feedstock for biofuel production and can become a crucial plant extract in the development of a new class of biofuels.

Lignin biosynthesis begins in the cytosol with the synthesis of glycosylated monolignols from the amino acid phenylalanine. These first reactions are shared with the phenylpropanoid pathway. The attached glucose renders them water-soluble and less toxic. Once transported through the cell membrane to the apoplast, the glucose is removed, and the polymerisation commences. Much about its anabolism is not understood even after more than a century of study.
The polymerisation step, that is a radical-radical coupling, is catalysed by oxidative enzymes. Both peroxidase and laccase enzymes are present in the plant cell walls, and it is not known whether one or both of these groups participates in the polymerisation. Low molecular weight oxidants might also be involved. The oxidative enzyme catalyses the formation of monolignol radicals. These radicals are often said to undergo uncatalyzed coupling to form the lignin polymer, but this hypothesis has been recently challenged. The alternative theory that involves an unspecified biological control is however not widely accepted.

In contrast to other bio-polymers (e.g. proteins, DNA, and even cellulose), lignin is resistant to degradation and acid- and base-catalyzed hydrolysis. However the extent to which lignin does or does not degrade varies with species and plant tissue type. For example, syringyl (S) lignol is more susceptible to degradation by fungal decay as it has fewer aryl-aryl bonds and a lower redox potential than guaiacyl units. Because it is cross-linked with the other cell wall components, lignin minimizes the accessibility of cellulose and hemicellulose to microbial enzymes, leading to a reduced digestibility of biomass.

Some ligninolytic enzymes include heme peroxidases such as lignin peroxidases, manganese peroxidases, versatile peroxidases, and dye-decolourizing peroxidases as well as copper-based laccases. Lignin peroxidases oxidize non-phenolic lignin, whereas manganese peroxidases only oxidize the phenolic structures. Dye-decolorizing peroxidases, or DyPs, exhibit catalytic activity on a wide range of lignin model compounds, but their "in vivo" substrate is unknown. In general, laccases oxidize phenolic substrates but some fungal laccases have been shown to oxidize non-phenolic substrates in the presence of synthetic redox mediators.

Well-studied ligninolytic enzymes are found in "Phanerochaete chrysosporium" and other white rot fungi. Some white rot fungi, such as "C. subvermispora", can degrade the lignin in lignocellulose, but others lack this ability. Most fungal lignin degradation involves secreted peroxidases. Many fungal laccases are also secreted, which facilitate degradation of phenolic lignin-derived compounds, although several intracellular fungal laccases have also been described. An important aspect of fungal lignin degradation is the activity of accessory enzymes to produce the HO required for the function of lignin peroxidase and other heme peroxidases.

Bacteria lack most of the enzymes employed in fungal lignin degradation, yet bacterial degradation can be quite extensive. The ligninolytic activity of bacteria has not been studied extensively even though it was first described in 1930. Many bacterial DyPs have been characterized. Bacteria do not express any of the plant-type peroxidases (lignin peroxidase, Mn peroxidase, or versatile peroxidases), but three of the four classes of DyP are only found in bacteria. In contrast to fungi, most bacterial enzymes involved in lignin degradation are intracellular, including two classes of DyP and most bacterial laccases.

Bacterial degradation of lignin is particularly relevant in aquatic systems such as lakes, rivers, and streams, where inputs of terrestrial material (e.g. leaf litter) can enter waterways and leach dissolved organic carbon rich in lignin, cellulose, and hemicellulose. In the environment, lignin can be degraded either biotically via bacteria or abiotically via photochemical alteration, and oftentimes the latter assists in the former. In addition to the presence or absence of light, several of environmental factors affect the biodegradability of lignin, including bacterial community composition, mineral associations, and redox state.

Pyrolysis of lignin during the combustion of wood or charcoal production yields a range of products, of which the most characteristic ones are methoxy-substituted phenols. Of those, the most important are guaiacol and syringol and their derivatives. Their presence can be used to trace a smoke source to a wood fire. In cooking, lignin in the form of hardwood is an important source of these two compounds, which impart the characteristic aroma and taste to smoked foods such as barbecue. The main flavor compounds of smoked ham are guaiacol, and its 4-, 5-, and 6-methyl derivatives as well as 2,6-dimethylphenol. These compounds are produced by thermal breakdown of lignin in the wood used in the smokehouse.

The conventional method for lignin quantitation in the pulp industry is the Klason lignin and acid-soluble lignin test, which is standardized according to TAPPI or NREL procedure. The cellulose is first decrystallized and partially depolymerized into oligomers by keeping the sample in 72% sulfuric acid at 30 °C for 1 h. Then, the acid is diluted to 4% by adding water, and the depolymerization is completed by either boiling (100 °C) for 4 h or pressure cooking at 2 bar (124 °C) for 1 h. The acid is washed out and the sample dried. The residue that remains is termed Klason lignin. A part of the lignin, acid-soluble lignin (ASL) dissolves in the acid. ASL is quantified by the intensity of its UV absorption peak at 280 nm. The method is suited for wood lignins, but not equally well for varied lignins from different sources. The carbohydrate composition may be also analyzed from the Klason liquors, although there may be sugar breakdown products (furfural and 5-hydroxymethylfurfural).

A solution of hydrochloric acid and phloroglucinol is used for the detection of lignin (Wiesner test). A brilliant red color develops, owing to the presence of coniferaldehyde groups in the lignin.

Thioglycolysis is an analytical technique for lignin quantitation. Lignin structure can also be studied by computational simulation.

Thermochemolysis (chemical break down of a substance under vacuum and at high temperature) with tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH) or cupric oxide has also been used to characterize lignin chemical composition. The ratio of syringyl lignol (S) to vanillyl lignol (V) and cinnamyl lignol (C) to vanillyl lignol (V) is variable based on plant type and can therefore be used to trace plant sources in aquatic systems (woody vs. non-woody and angiosperm vs. gymnosperm). Ratios of carboxylic acid (Ad) to aldehyde (Al) forms of the lignols (Ad/Al) reveal diagenetic information, with higher ratios indicating a more highly degraded material. Increases in the (Ad/Al) value indicate an oxidative cleavage reaction has occurred on the alkyl lignin side chain which has been shown to be a step in the decay of wood by many white-rot and some soft rot fungi.

Solid state Carbon-13 NMR|C NMR has been used to look at the concentrations of lignin, as well as other major components in wood e.g. cellulose, and how that changes with microbial decay. Conventional solution-state NMR for lignin is possible. However, many intact lignins have a crosslinked, very high molar-mass fraction that is difficult to dissolve even for functionalization.

More recent developments in the field have resulted in high throughput analysis of Lignin using a pyrolyzer and Molecular Beam Mass Spectrometer. With this method, a hundred samples can be run in a day and does not require any wet chemistry.



</doc>
<doc id="2390680" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2390680" title="Entomophily">
Entomophily

Entomophily or insect pollination is a form of pollination whereby pollen of plants, especially but not only of flowering plants, is distributed by insects. Flowers pollinated by insects typically advertise themselves with bright colours, sometimes with conspicuous patterns (honey guides) leading to rewards of pollen and nectar; they may also have an attractive scent which in some cases mimics insect pheromones. Insect pollinators such as bees have adaptations for their role, such as lapping or sucking mouthparts to take in nectar, and in some species also pollen baskets on their hind legs. This required the coevolution of insects and flowering plants in the development of pollination behaviour by the insects and pollination mechanisms by the flowers, benefiting both groups.

The early spermatophytes (seed plants) were largely dependent on the wind to carry their pollen from one plant to another, and it was around 125 to 115 million years ago that a new pollination strategy developed and angiosperms (flowering plants) first appeared. Before that, insect involvement in pollination was limited to "pollination assistants", insects which inadvertently carried the pollen between plants merely by their movements. The real relationship between plants and insects began in the Early Cretaceous, with beetle-pollinated gymnosperms. The morphology of the first fossil basal angiosperms is similar to modern-day plants that are also fertilised by beetles. It seems likely that beetles led the way in insect pollination, followed by flies. Among the twelve living families of basal angiosperms, six are predominantly pollinated by flies, five by beetles and only one by bees. Nevertheless, traits such as sapromyophily (emitting the odour of carrion to attract flies) have evolved independently in several unrelated angiosperm families.

Wind and water pollination require the production of vast quantities of pollen because of the chancy nature of its deposition. If they are not to be reliant on the wind or water (for aquatic species), plants need pollinators to move their pollen grains from one plant to another. They particularly need pollinators to consistently choose flowers of the same species, so they have evolved different lures to encourage specific pollinators to maintain fidelity to the same species. The attractions offered are mainly nectar, pollen, fragrances and oils. The ideal pollinating insect is hairy (so that pollen adheres to it), and spends time exploring the flower so that it comes into contact with the reproductive structures.

Many insects are pollinators, particularly bees, Lepidoptera (butterflies and moths), wasps, flies, ants and beetles. On the other hand, some plants are generalists, being pollinated by insects in several orders. Entomophilous plant species have frequently evolved mechanisms to make themselves more appealing to insects, e.g., brightly coloured or scented flowers, nectar, or appealing shapes and patterns. Pollen grains of entomophilous plants are generally larger than the fine pollens of anemophilous (wind-pollinated) plants, which has to be produced in much larger quantities because such a high proportion is wasted. This is energetically costly, but in contrast, entomophilous plants have to bear the energetic costs of producing nectar.
Butterflies and moths have hairy bodies and long proboscides which can probe deep into tubular flowers. Butterflies mostly fly by day and are particularly attracted to pink, mauve and purple flowers. The flowers are often large and scented, and the stamens are so-positioned that pollen is deposited on the insects while they feed on the nectar. Moths are mostly nocturnal and are attracted by night-blooming plants. The flowers of these are often tubular, pale in colour and fragrant only at night. Hawkmoths tend to visit larger flowers and hover as they feed; they transfer pollen by means of the proboscis. Other moths land on the usually smaller flowers, which may be aggregated into flowerheads. Their energetic needs are not so great as those of hawkmoths and they are offered smaller quantities of nectar.

Inflorescences pollinated by beetles tend to be flat with open corollas or small flowers clustered in a head with multiple, projecting anthers that shed pollen readily. The flowers are often green or pale-coloured, and heavily scented, often with fruity or spicy aromas, but sometimes with odours of decaying organic matter. Some, like the giant water lily, include traps designed to retain the beetles in contact with the reproductive parts for longer periods.
Unspecialised flies with short proboscides are found visiting primitive flowers with readily accessible nectar. More specialised flies like syrphids and tabanids can visit more advanced blooms, but their purpose is to nourish themselves, and any transfer of pollen from one flower to another happens haphazardly. The small size of many flies is often made up for by their abundance, however they are unreliable pollinators as they may bear incompatible pollen, and lack of suitable breeding habitats may limit their activities. Some "Pterostylis" orchids are pollinated by midges unique to each species. A decline, for whatever reason, to one side of this partnership can be catastrophic for the other.

Flowers pollinated by bees and wasps vary in shape, colour and size. Yellow or blue plants are often visited, and flowers may have ultra-violet nectar guides, that help the insect to find the nectary. Some flowers, like sage or pea, have lower lips that will only open when sufficiently heavy insects, such as bees, land on them. With the lip depressed, the anthers may bow down to deposit pollen on the insect's back. Other flowers, like tomato, may only liberate their pollen by buzz pollination, a technique in which a bumblebee will cling on to a flower while vibrating its flight muscles, and this dislodges the pollen. Because bees care for their brood, they need to collect more food than just to maintain themselves, and therefore are important pollinators. 
Other bees are nectar thieves and bite their way through the corolla in order to raid the nectary, in the process bypassing the reproductive structures.

Ants are not well adapted to pollination but they have been shown to perform this function in "Polygonum cascadense" and in certain desert plants with small blossoms near the ground with little fragrance or visual attraction, small quantities of nectar and limited quantities of sticky pollen.

Some plant species co-evolved with a particular pollinator species, such as the bee orchid. The species is almost exclusively self-pollinating in its northern ranges, but is pollinated by the solitary bee "Eucera" in the Mediterranean area. The plant attracts these insects by producing a scent that mimics the scent of the female bee. In addition, the lip acts as a decoy, as the male bee confuses it with a female that is visiting a pink flower. Pollen transfer occurs during the ensuing pseudocopulation.

Figs in the genus "Ficus" have a mutualistic arrangement with certain tiny agaonid wasps. In the common fig, the inflorescence is a syconium, formed by an enlarged, fleshy, hollow receptacle with multiple ovaries on the inner surface. A female wasp enters through a narrow aperture, fertilises these pistillate flowers and lays its eggs in some ovaries, with galls being formed by the developing larvae. In due course, staminate flowers develop inside the syconium. Wingless male wasps hatch and mate with females in the galls before tunnelling their way out of the developing fruit. The winged females, now laden with pollen, follow, flying off to find other receptive syconia at the right stage of development. Most species of fig have their own unique commensal species of wasp.

The word is artificially derived from the Greek: εντομο-, "entomo-" "cut in pieces, segmented", hence "insect"; and φίλη, "phile", "loved".

Wind pollination is the reproductive strategy adopted by the grasses, sedges, rushes and catkin-bearing plants. Other flowering plants are mostly pollinated by insects (or birds or bats), which seems to be the primitive state, and some plants have secondarily developed wind pollination. Some plants that are wind pollinated have vestigial nectaries, and other plants like common heather that are regularly pollinated by insects, produce clouds of pollen and some wind pollination is inevitable. The hoary plantain is primarily wind pollinated, but is also visited by insects which pollinate it. In general, showy, colourful, fragrant flowers like sunflowers, orchids and "Buddleja" are insect pollinated. The only entomophilous plants that are not seed plants are the dung-mosses of the family Splachnaceae.



</doc>
<doc id="54147200" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54147200" title="National Centre for Plant Genetic Resources: Polish Genebank">
National Centre for Plant Genetic Resources: Polish Genebank

The National Centre for Plant Genetic Resources: Polish Genebank (NCPGR) is a research unit in the Plant Breeding and Acclimatization Institute – National Research Institute. NCPGR is the coordinator and implementer of the National Crop Plant Genetic Resources Protection Programme. The Programme aims to protect the biodiversity of crop plants endangered by genetic erosion in Poland, and is funded by the Ministry of Agriculture. The main tasks include collection of crop and wild plant populations and varieties threatened by genetic erosion, description and evaluation of collected materials, and preservation of their viability and genetic purity. The Programme is an implementation of provisions laid down in international treaties ratified by Poland:

NCPGR collects populations and cultivated varieties of crop and wild plants threatened with genetic erosion. Collected materials are characterised, evaluated and documented.

Seed samples and clones are maintained in viable state and genetic purity. NCPGR exchanges samples with other institutions worldwide and provides initial plant materials for breeding and research programs.

The Laboratory organizes collecting expeditions, during which plant genetic resources are obtained. Plants are collected from natural sites or obtained from farmers or on local markets. Collected material is reproduced and stored in a gene bank. The Laboratory also carries out studies of variation and genetic structure of selected species and prepares initial materials of selected species for practical breeding.

The Laboratory covers drawing up documentation of genetic resources of crop plants and exchanges information with other genebanks. It also obtains seed samples of crop plants from national and international breeding centres. As for the long-term conservation, seed samples need to be prepared and have their viability tested before they are stored in temperature controlled chambers. NCPGR has three long-term storage chambers (-18 °C) and five medium-term storage chambers (0 °C).

The seeds exposed to long-term preservation are tested for viability and biochemical changes. Seed samples with low seed viability or with insufficient seed amount are forwarded for regeneration. The Laboratory provides seed samples for breeding, research and education.

The Laboratory searches for and collects local and foreign plant species with increased ability to adapt to extreme conditions of devastated environment. Another objective is regeneration and maintenance of viability of alternative plant collection for reclamation of devastated lands and lands periodically excluded from agricultural use.

Selected plant species are analyzed for having the ability to colonize different types of industrial and communal derivative areas. There is also description of morphological and other useful plant traits carried out when it comes to plants which have high biological yielding potential to serve as a source of energy and for other economic uses.

The Laboratory prepares initial material for the breeding programmes of alternative crops.

The key activity of Botanical Garden is evaluation and preservation of grass genetic resources. The plants originated from various climatic zones are maintained in different, highly specialized collections. Natural resources of Botanical Garden include:




</doc>
<doc id="54780428" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54780428" title="Stomatophyta">
Stomatophyta

The Stomatophyta are a proposed sister branch of the Marchantiophyta (Liverworts), together forming the Embryophyta. The Stomatophyta consist of the Bryophyta (Moss), and the remainder of the Embryophyta, including the Anthocerotophyta (Hornsworts). The word stomatophyta means "plant with stoma".

An updated phylogeny of Embryophyta based on the work by Novíkov & Barabaš-Krasni 2015 with plant taxon authors from Anderson, Anderson & Cleal 2007 and some clade names from Pelletier 2012 and Lecointre, et al.


</doc>
<doc id="216226" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=216226" title="Vegetation">
Vegetation

Vegetation is an assemblage of plant species and the ground cover they provide. It is a general term, without specific reference to particular taxa, life forms, structure, spatial extent, or any other specific botanical or geographic characteristics. It is broader than the term "flora" which refers to species composition. Perhaps the closest synonym is plant community, but "vegetation" can, and often does, refer to a wider range of spatial scales than that term does, including scales as large as the global. Primeval redwood forests, coastal mangrove stands, sphagnum bogs, desert soil crusts, roadside weed patches, wheat fields, cultivated gardens and lawns; all are encompassed by the term "vegetation".

The vegetation type is defined by characteristic dominant species, or a common aspect of the assemblage, such as an elevation range or environmental commonality. The contemporary use of "vegetation" approximates that of ecologist Frederic Clements' term earth cover, an expression still used by the Bureau of Land Management.

The distinction between vegetation (the general appearance of a community) and flora (the taxonomic composition of a community) was first made by Jules Thurmann (1849). Prior to this, the two terms (vegetation and flora) were used indiscriminately, and still are in some contexts. Augustin de Candolle (1820) also made a similar distinction, but he used the terms "station" (habitat type) and "habitation" (botanical region). Later, the concept of vegetation would influence the usage of the term biome, with the inclusion of the animal element.

Other concepts similar to vegetation are "physiognomy of vegetation" (Humboldt, 1805, 1807) and "formation" (Grisebach, 1838, derived from "Vegetationsform", Martius, 1824).

Departing from Linnean taxonomy, Humboldt established a new science, dividing plant geography between taxonomists who studied plants as taxa and geographers who studied plants as vegetation. The physiognomic approach in the study of vegetation is common among biogeographers working on vegetation on a world scale, or when there is a lack of taxonomic knowledge of someplace (e.g., in the tropics, where biodiversity is commonly high).

The concept of "vegetation type" is more ambiguous. The definition of a specific vegetation type may include not only physiognomy but also floristic and habitat aspects. Furthermore, the phytosociological approach in the study of vegetation relies upon a fundamental unit, the plant association, which is defined upon flora.

An influential, clear and simple classification scheme for types of vegetation was produced by Wagner & von Sydow (1888). Other important works with a physiognomic approach includes Grisebach (1872), Warming (1895, 1909), Schimper (1898), Tansley and Chipp (1926), Rübel (1930), Burtt Davy (1938), Beard (1944, 1955), André Aubréville (1956, 1957), Trochain (1955, 1957), Küchler (1967), Ellenberg and Mueller-Dombois (1967) (see vegetation classification).

There are many approaches for the classification of vegetation (physiognomy, flora, ecology, etc.). Much of the work on vegetation classification comes from European and North American ecologists, and they have fundamentally different approaches. In North America, vegetation types are based on a combination of the following criteria: climate pattern, plant habit, phenology and/or growth form, and dominant species. In the current US standard (adopted by the Federal Geographic Data Committee (FGDC), and originally developed by UNESCO and The Nature Conservancy), the classification is hierarchical and incorporates the non-floristic criteria into the upper (most general) five levels and limited floristic criteria only into the lower (most specific) two levels. In Europe, classification often relies much more heavily, sometimes entirely, on floristic (species) composition alone, without explicit reference to climate, phenology or growth forms. It often emphasizes indicator or diagnostic species which may distinguish one classification from another.

In the FGDC standard, the hierarchy levels, from most general to most specific, are: "system, class, subclass, group, formation, alliance, "and" association". The lowest level, or association, is thus the most precisely defined, and incorporates the names of the dominant one to three (usually two) species of a type. An example of a vegetation type defined at the level of class might be ""Forest, canopy cover > 60%"; at the level of a formation as "Winter-rain, broad-leaved, evergreen, sclerophyllous, closed-canopy forest"; at the level of alliance as "Arbutus menziesii" forest"; and at the level of association as ""Arbutus menziesii-Lithocarpus dense flora" forest", referring to Pacific madrone-tanoak forests which occur in California and Oregon, USA. In practice, the levels of the alliance and/or an association are the most often used, particularly in vegetation mapping, just as the Latin binomial is most often used in discussing particular species in taxonomy and in general communication.

Like all the biological systems, plant communities are temporally and spatially dynamic; they change at all possible scales. Dynamism in vegetation is defined primarily as changes in species composition and/or vegetation structure.

Temporally, a large number of processes or events can cause change, but for sake of simplicity, they can be categorized roughly as either abrupt or gradual. Abrupt changes are generally referred to as disturbances; these include things like wildfires, high winds, landslides, floods, avalanches and the like. Their causes are usually external (exogenous) to the community—they are natural processes occurring (mostly) independently of the natural processes of the community (such as germination, growth, death, etc.). Such events can change vegetation structure and composition very quickly and for long time periods, and they can do so over large areas. Very few ecosystems are without some type of disturbance as a regular and recurring part of the long term system dynamic. Fire and wind disturbances are particularly common throughout many vegetation types worldwide. Fire is particularly potent because of its ability to destroy not only living plants, but also the seeds, spores, and living meristems representing the potential next generation, and because of fire's impact on fauna populations, soil characteristics and other ecosystem elements and processes (for further discussion of this topic see fire ecology).

Temporal change at a slower pace is ubiquitous; it comprises the field of ecological succession. Succession is the relatively gradual change in structure and taxonomic composition that arises as the vegetation itself modifies various environmental variables over time, including light, water and nutrient levels. These modifications change the suite of species most adapted to grow, survive and reproduce in an area, causing floristic changes. These floristic changes contribute to structural changes that are inherent in plant growth even in the absence of species changes (especially where plants have a large maximum size, i.e. trees), causing slow and broadly predictable changes in the vegetation. Succession can be interrupted at any time by disturbance, setting the system either back to a previous state, or off on another trajectory altogether. Because of this, successional processes may or may not lead to some static, final state. Moreover, accurately predicting the characteristics of such a state, even if it does arise, is not always possible. In short, vegetative communities are subject to many variables that together set limits on the predictability of future conditions.

As a general rule, the larger an area under consideration, the more likely the vegetation will be heterogeneous across it. Two main factors are at work. First, the temporal dynamics of disturbance and succession are increasingly unlikely to be in synchrony across any area as the size of that area increases. That is, different areas will be at different developmental stages due to different local histories, particularly their times since last major disturbance. This fact interacts with inherent environmental variability (e.g. in soils, climate, topography, etc.), which is also a function of area. Environmental variability constrains the suite of species that can occupy a given area, and the two factors together interact to create a mosaic of vegetation conditions across the landscape. Only in agricultural or horticultural systems does vegetation ever approach perfect uniformity. In natural systems, there is always heterogeneity, although its scale and intensity will vary widely..







</doc>
<doc id="2038320" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2038320" title="Native plant">
Native plant

Native plants are plants indigenous to a given area in geologic time. This includes plants that have developed, occur naturally, or existed for many years in an area.

An ecosystem consists of interactions of plants, animals, and microorganisms with their physical (such as soil conditions and processes) and climatic conditions. Native plants form plant communities and biological interactions with specific flora, fauna, fungi, and other organisms. For example, some plant species can only reproduce with a continued mutualistic interaction with a certain animal pollinator, and the pollinating animal may also be dependent on that plant species for a food source. Some native plants have adapted to very limited, unusual, or harsh conditions, such as cold climates or frequent wildfires. Others can live in diverse areas or adapt well to different surroundings. 

The diversity of species across many parts of the world exists only because bioregions are separated by barriers, particularly large rivers, seas, oceans, mountains, and deserts. Humans can introduce species that have never met in their evolutionary history, on varying time scales ranging from days to decades (Long, 1981; Vermeij, 1991). Humans are moving species across the globe at an unprecedented rate. Those working to address invasive species view this as an increased risk to indigenous species.

As humans introduce plants to new locations for cultivation, or transport them by accident, some of them may become invasive species, damaging native plant communities. Invasive species can have profound effects on ecosystems by changing ecosystem structure, function, species abundance, and community composition. Besides ecological damage, these species can also damage agriculture, infrastructure, and cultural assets. Government agencies and environmental groups are directing increasing resources to addressing these species. 

When restoration projects are undertaken to restore a native ecological system disturbed by economic development or other events, they may be historically inaccurate, incomplete, or pay little or no attention to ecotype accuracy or type conversions. They may fail to restore the original ecological system by overlooking the basics of remediation. Attention paid to the historical distribution of native species is a crucial first step to ensure the ecological integrity of the project. For example, to prevent erosion of the recontoured sand dunes at the western edge of the Los Angeles International Airport in 1975, landscapers stabilized the backdunes with a “natural” seed mix (Mattoni 1989a). Unfortunately, the seed mix was representative of coastal sage scrub, an exogenous plant community, instead of the native dune scrub community. As a result, the El Segundo blue butterfly "(Euphilotes battoides allyni)" became an endangered species. The El Segundo Blue butterfly population, which had once extended over 3200 acres along the coastal dunes from to Ocean Park to Malaga cove in Palos Verdes, began to recover when the invasive California buckwheat "(Eriogonum fasciculatum)" was uprooted so that the butterflies' original native plant host, the dune buckwheat "(Eriogonum parvifolium)," could regain some of its lost habitat.

Native plant organizations such as Wild Ones, native plant societies, and Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center encourage the use of native plants, especially in public spaces. The identification of local remnant natural areas provides a basis for their work.

The use of native cultivars is a widely disputed practice among native plant advocates.



</doc>
<doc id="1617971" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1617971" title="Pteridophyte">
Pteridophyte

A pteridophyte is a vascular plant (with xylem and phloem) that disperses spores. Because pteridophytes produce neither flowers nor seeds, they are sometimes referred to as "cryptogams", meaning that their means of reproduction is hidden. Ferns, horsetails (often treated as ferns), and lycophytes (clubmosses, spikemosses, and quillworts) are all pteridophytes. However, they do not form a monophyletic group because ferns (and horsetails) are more closely related to seed plants than to lycophytes. "Pteridophyta" is thus no longer a widely accepted taxon, but the term "pteridophyte" remains in common parlance, as do "pteridology" and "pteridologist" as a science and its practitioner, respectively. Ferns and lycophytes share a life cycle and are often collectively treated or studied, for example by the International Association of Pteridologists and the Pteridophyte Phylogeny Group.

Pteridophytes (ferns and lycophytes) are free-sporing vascular plants that have a life cycle with alternating, free-living gametophyte and sporophyte phases that are independent at maturity. The body of the sporophyte is well differentiated into roots, stem and leaves. The root system is always adventitious. The stem is either underground or aerial. The leaves may be microphylls or megaphylls. Their other common characteristics include vascular plant apomorphies (e.g., vascular tissue) and land plant plesiomorphies (e.g., spore dispersal and the absence of seeds). 

Of the pteridophytes, ferns account for nearly 90% of the extant diversity. Smith et al. (2006), the first higher-level pteridophyte classification published in the molecular phylogenetic era, considered the ferns as monilophytes, as follows:

where the monilophytes comprise about 9,000 species, including horsetails (Equisetaceae), whisk ferns (Psilotaceae), and all eusporangiate and all leptosporangiate ferns. Historically both lycophytes and monilophytes were grouped together as pteridophytes (ferns and fern allies) on the basis of being spore-bearing ("seed-free"). In Smith's molecular phylogenetic study the ferns are characterised by lateral root origin in the endodermis, usually mesarch protoxylem in shoots, a pseudoendospore, plasmodial tapetum, and sperm cells with 30-1000 flagella. The term "moniliform" as in Moniliformopses and monilophytes means "bead-shaped" and was introduced by Kenrick and Crane (1997) as a scientific replacement for "fern" (including Equisetaceae) and became established by Pryer et al. (2004). Christenhusz and Chase (2014) in their review of classification schemes provide a critique of this usage, which they discouraged as irrational. In fact the alternative name Filicopsida was already in use. By comparison "lycopod" or lycophyte (club moss) means wolf-plant. The term "fern ally" included under Pteridophyta generally refers to vascular spore-bearing plants that are not ferns, including lycopods, horsetails, whisk ferns and water ferns (Marsileaceae, Salviniaceae and "Ceratopteris"), and even a much wider range of taxa. This is not a natural grouping but rather a convenient term for non-fern, and is also discouraged, as is eusporangiate for non-leptosporangiate ferns.

However both Infradivision and Moniliformopses are also invalid names under the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature. Ferns, despite forming a monophyletic clade, are formally only considered as four classes (Psilotopsida; Equisetopsida; Marattiopsida; Polypodiopsida), 11 orders and 37 families, without assigning a higher taxonomic rank.

Furthermore, within the Polypodiopsida, the largest grouping, a number of informal clades were recognised, including leptosporangiates, core leptosporangiates, polypods (Polypodiales), and eupolypods (including Eupolypods I and Eupolypods II).

In 2014 Christenhusz and Chase, summarising the known knowledge at that time, treated this group as two separate unrelated taxa in a consensus classification;
These subclasses correspond to Smith's four classes, with Ophioglossidae corresponding to Psilotopsida.

The two major groups previously included in Pteridophyta are phylogenetically related as follows:

Pteridophytes consist of two separate but related classes, whose nomenclature has varied. The system put forward by the Pteridophyte Phylogeny Group in 2016, PPG I, is:


In addition to these living groups, several groups of pteridophytes are now extinct and known only from fossils. These groups include the Rhyniopsida, Zosterophyllopsida, Trimerophytopsida, the Lepidodendrales and the Progymnospermopsida.

Modern studies of the land plants agree that all pteridophytes share a common ancestor with seed plants. Therefore, pteridophytes do not form a clade but constitute a paraphyletic group.

Just as with bryophytes and spermatophytes (seed plants), the life cycle of pteridophytes involves alternation of generations. This means that a diploid generation (the sporophyte, which produces spores) is followed by a haploid generation (the gametophyte or prothallus, which produces gametes). Pteridophytes differ from bryophytes in that the sporophyte is branched and generally much larger and more conspicuous, and from seed plants in that both generations are independent and free-living. The sexuality of pteridophyte gametophytes can be classified as follows:


These terms are "not" the same as monoecious and dioecious, which refer to whether a seed plant's sporophyte bears both male and female gametophytes, i. e., produces both pollen and seeds, or just one of the sexes.





</doc>
<doc id="31399836" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31399836" title="Catenalis">
Catenalis

Catenalis is a genus of extinct plants of the Early Devonian (Pragian, around ). Fossils were first found in the Posongchong Formation of eastern Yunnan, China. The leafless stems (axes) bore 10-12 elliptical spore-forming organs or sporangia on side branches. To release their spores, the sporangia split at the opposite end to their attachment to the stem. Its phylogenetic relationship to other land plants is considered uncertain at present.


</doc>
<doc id="31400316" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31400316" title="Celatheca">
Celatheca

Celatheca is a genus of extinct plants of the Early Devonian (Pragian, around ). Fossils were first found in the Posongchong Formation of eastern Yunnan, China. The leafless stems (axes) divided dichotomously but unequally so that one branch formed more of a 'main' stem and the other a side branch system. Side branches which did not bear spore-forming organs or sporangia divided two or three times further, ending in tips which curled back on themselves. Side branches bearing sporangia ultimately divided to produce a group of four sporangia, each with an outer leaf-like bract which folded around the sporangium. "Celatheca" resembles the Australian fossil "Yarravia".


</doc>
<doc id="18967" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18967" title="Flowering plant">
Flowering plant

The flowering plants, also known as angiosperms, Angiospermae, or Magnoliophyta, are the most diverse group of land plants, with 64 orders, 416 families, approximately 13,000 known genera and 300,000 known species. Like gymnosperms, angiosperms are seed-producing plants. They are distinguished from gymnosperms by characteristics including flowers, endosperm within the seeds, and the production of fruits that contain the seeds. Etymologically, "angiosperm" means a plant that produces seeds within an enclosure; in other words, a fruiting plant. The term comes from the Greek words ("case" or "casing") and ("seed").

The ancestors of flowering plants diverged from gymnosperms in the Triassic Period, 245 to 202 million years ago (mya), and the first flowering plants are known from ~140 mya. They diversified extensively during the Early Cretaceous, became widespread by 120 mya, and replaced conifers as the dominant trees from 100 to 60 mya.

Angiosperms differ from other seed plants in several ways, described in the table below. These distinguishing characteristics taken together have made the angiosperms the most diverse and numerous land plants and the most commercially important group to humans.

Angiosperm stems are made up of seven layers as shown on the right. The amount and complexity of tissue-formation in flowering plants exceeds that of gymnosperms. The vascular bundles of the stem are arranged such that the xylem and phloem form concentric rings.

In the dicotyledons, the bundles in the very young stem are arranged in an open ring, separating a central pith from an outer cortex. In each bundle, separating the xylem and phloem, is a layer of meristem or active formative tissue known as cambium. By the formation of a layer of cambium between the bundles (interfascicular cambium), a complete ring is formed, and a regular periodical increase in thickness results from the development of xylem on the inside and phloem on the outside. The soft phloem becomes crushed, but the hard wood persists and forms the bulk of the stem and branches of the woody perennial. Owing to differences in the character of the elements produced at the beginning and end of the season, the wood is marked out in transverse section into concentric rings, one for each season of growth, called annual rings.

Among the monocotyledons, the bundles are more numerous in the young stem and are scattered through the ground tissue. They contain no cambium and once formed the stem increases in diameter only in exceptional cases.

The characteristic feature of angiosperms is the flower. Flowers show remarkable variation in form and elaboration, and provide the most trustworthy external characteristics for establishing relationships among angiosperm species. The function of the flower is to ensure fertilization of the ovule and development of fruit containing seeds. The floral apparatus may arise terminally on a shoot or from the axil of a leaf (where the petiole attaches to the stem). Occasionally, as in violets, a flower arises singly in the axil of an ordinary foliage-leaf. More typically, the flower-bearing portion of the plant is sharply distinguished from the foliage-bearing or vegetative portion, and forms a more or less elaborate branch-system called an inflorescence.

There are two kinds of reproductive cells produced by flowers. Microspores, which will divide to become pollen grains, are the "male" cells and are borne in the stamens (or microsporophylls). The "female" cells called megaspores, which will divide to become the egg cell (megagametogenesis), are contained in the ovule and enclosed in the carpel (or megasporophyll).

The flower may consist only of these parts, as in willow, where each flower comprises only a few stamens or two carpels. Usually, other structures are present and serve to protect the sporophylls and to form an envelope attractive to pollinators. The individual members of these surrounding structures are known as sepals and petals (or tepals in flowers such as "Magnolia" where sepals and petals are not distinguishable from each other). The outer series (calyx of sepals) is usually green and leaf-like, and functions to protect the rest of the flower, especially the bud. The inner series (corolla of petals) is, in general, white or brightly colored, and is more delicate in structure. It functions to attract insect or bird pollinators. Attraction is effected by color, scent, and nectar, which may be secreted in some part of the flower. The characteristics that attract pollinators account for the popularity of flowers and flowering plants among humans.

While the majority of flowers are perfect or hermaphrodite (having both pollen and ovule producing parts in the same flower structure), flowering plants have developed numerous morphological and physiological mechanisms to reduce or prevent self-fertilization. Heteromorphic flowers have short carpels and long stamens, or vice versa, so animal pollinators cannot easily transfer pollen to the pistil (receptive part of the carpel). Homomorphic flowers may employ a biochemical (physiological) mechanism called self-incompatibility to discriminate between self and non-self pollen grains. In other species, the male and female parts are morphologically separated, developing on different flowers.

The botanical term "Angiosperm", from the Ancient Greek , (bottle, vessel) and , (seed), was coined in the form Angiospermae by Paul Hermann in 1690, as the name of one of his primary divisions of the plant kingdom. This included flowering plants possessing seeds enclosed in capsules, distinguished from his Gymnospermae, or flowering plants with achenial or schizo-carpic fruits, the whole fruit or each of its pieces being here regarded as a seed and naked. The term and its antonym were maintained by Carl Linnaeus with the same sense, but with restricted application, in the names of the orders of his class Didynamia. Its use with any approach to its modern scope became possible only after 1827, when Robert Brown established the existence of truly naked ovules in the Cycadeae and Coniferae, and applied to them the name Gymnosperms. From that time onward, as long as these Gymnosperms were, as was usual, reckoned as dicotyledonous flowering plants, the term Angiosperm was used antithetically by botanical writers, with varying scope, as a group-name for other dicotyledonous plants.
In 1851, Hofmeister discovered the changes occurring in the embryo-sac of flowering plants, and determined the correct relationships of these to the Cryptogamia. This fixed the position of Gymnosperms as a class distinct from Dicotyledons, and the term Angiosperm then gradually came to be accepted as the suitable designation for the whole of the flowering plants other than Gymnosperms, including the classes of Dicotyledons and Monocotyledons. This is the sense in which the term is used today.

In most taxonomies, the flowering plants are treated as a coherent group. The most popular descriptive name has been Angiospermae (Angiosperms), with Anthophyta ("flowering plants") a second choice. These names are not linked to any rank. The Wettstein system and the Engler system use the name Angiospermae, at the assigned rank of subdivision. The Reveal system treated flowering plants as subdivision Magnoliophytina, but later split it to Magnoliopsida, Liliopsida, and Rosopsida. The Takhtajan system and Cronquist system treat this group at the rank of division, leading to the name Magnoliophyta (from the family name Magnoliaceae). The Dahlgren system and Thorne system (1992) treat this group at the rank of class, leading to the name Magnoliopsida. The APG system of 1998, and the later 2003 and 2009 revisions, treat the flowering plants as a clade called angiosperms without a formal botanical name. A formal classification was published alongside the 2009 revision in which the flowering plants form the Subclass Magnoliidae.

The internal classification of this group has undergone considerable revision. The Cronquist system, proposed by Arthur Cronquist in 1968 and published in its full form in 1981, is still widely used but is no longer believed to accurately reflect phylogeny. A consensus about how the flowering plants should be arranged has recently begun to emerge through the work of the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group (APG), which published an influential reclassification of the angiosperms in 1998. Updates incorporating more recent research were published as the APG II system in 2003, the APG III system in 2009, and the APG IV system in 2016.

Traditionally, the flowering plants are divided into two groups,


which in the Cronquist system are called Magnoliopsida (at the rank of class, formed from the family name Magnoliaceae) and Liliopsida (at the rank of class, formed from the family name Liliaceae). Other descriptive names allowed by Article 16 of the ICBN include Dicotyledones or Dicotyledoneae, and Monocotyledones or Monocotyledoneae, which have a long history of use. In English a member of either group may be called a dicotyledon (plural dicotyledons) and monocotyledon (plural monocotyledons), or abbreviated, as dicot (plural dicots) and monocot (plural monocots). These names derive from the observation that the dicots most often have two cotyledons, or embryonic leaves, within each seed. The monocots usually have only one, but the rule is not absolute either way. From a broad diagnostic point of view, the number of cotyledons is neither a particularly handy, nor a reliable character.

Recent studies, as by the APG, show that the monocots form a monophyletic group (clade) but that the dicots do not (they are paraphyletic). Nevertheless, the majority of dicot species do form a monophyletic group, called the eudicots or tricolpates. Of the remaining dicot species, most belong to a third major clade known as the magnoliids, containing about 9,000 species. The rest include a paraphyletic grouping of early branching taxa known collectively as the basal angiosperms, plus the families Ceratophyllaceae and Chloranthaceae.

There are eight groups of living angiosperms:


The exact relationship between these eight groups is not yet clear, although there is agreement that the first three groups to diverge from the ancestral angiosperm were Amborellales, Nymphaeales, and Austrobaileyales. The term basal angiosperms refers to these three groups. Among the remaining five groups (core angiosperms), the relationship between the three broadest of these groups (magnoliids, monocots, and eudicots) remains unclear. Zeng and colleagues (Fig. 1) describe four competing schemes. Of these, eudicots and monocots are the largest and most diversified, with ~ 75% and 20% of angiosperm species, respectively. Some analyses make the magnoliids the first to diverge, others the monocots. "Ceratophyllum" seems to group with the eudicots rather than with the monocots. The 2016 Angiosperm Phylogeny Group revision (APG IV) retained the overall higher order relationship described in APG III.

Fossilized spores suggest that land plants (embryophytes) have existed for at least 475 million years. Early land plants reproduced sexually with flagellated, swimming sperm, like the green algae from which they evolved. An adaptation to terrestrialization was the development of upright meiosporangia for dispersal by spores to new habitats. This feature is lacking in the descendants of their nearest algal relatives, the Charophycean green algae. A later terrestrial adaptation took place with retention of the delicate, avascular sexual stage, the gametophyte, within the tissues of the vascular sporophyte. This occurred by spore germination within sporangia rather than spore release, as in non-seed plants. A current example of how this might have happened can be seen in the precocious spore germination in "Selaginella", the spike-moss. The result for the ancestors of angiosperms was enclosing them in a case, the seed. 

The apparently sudden appearance of nearly modern flowers in the fossil record initially posed such a problem for the theory of evolution that Charles Darwin called it an "abominable mystery". However, the fossil record has considerably grown since the time of Darwin, and recently discovered angiosperm fossils such as "Archaefructus", along with further discoveries of fossil gymnosperms, suggest how angiosperm characteristics may have been acquired in a series of steps. Several groups of extinct gymnosperms, in particular seed ferns, have been proposed as the ancestors of flowering plants, but there is no continuous fossil evidence showing exactly how flowers evolved. Some older fossils, such as the upper Triassic "Sanmiguelia", have been suggested. 

The first seed bearing plants, like the ginkgo, and conifers (such as pines and firs), did not produce flowers. The pollen grains (male gametophytes) of "Ginkgo" and cycads produce a pair of flagellated, mobile sperm cells that "swim" down the developing pollen tube to the female and her eggs. 

Oleanane, a secondary metabolite produced by many flowering plants, has been found in Permian deposits of that age together with fossils of gigantopterids. Gigantopterids are a group of extinct seed plants that share many morphological traits with flowering plants, although they are not known to have been flowering plants themselves. 

Based on current evidence, some propose that the ancestors of the angiosperms diverged from an unknown group of gymnosperms in the Triassic period (245–202 million years ago). Fossil angiosperm-like pollen from the Middle Triassic (247.2–242.0 Ma) suggests an older date for their origin. A close relationship between angiosperms and gnetophytes, proposed on the basis of morphological evidence, has more recently been disputed on the basis of molecular evidence that suggest gnetophytes are instead more closely related to other gymnosperms. 

The fossil plant species "Nanjinganthus dendrostyla" from Early Jurassic China seems to share many exclusively angiosperm features, such as a thickened receptacle with ovules, and thus might represent a crown-group or a stem-group angiosperm. However, the interpretation of the structures in this fossils are highly contested. 

The evolution of seed plants and later angiosperms appears to be the result of two distinct rounds of whole genome duplication events. These occurred at and . Another possible whole genome duplication event at perhaps created the ancestral line that led to all modern flowering plants. That event was studied by sequencing the genome of an ancient flowering plant, "Amborella trichopoda", and directly addresses Darwin's "abominable mystery". 

One study has suggested that the early-middle Jurassic plant "Schmeissneria", traditionally considered a type of ginkgo, may be the earliest known angiosperm, or at least a close relative.

It has been proposed that the swift rise of angiosperms to dominance was facilitated by a reduction in their genome size. During the early Cretaceous period, only angiosperms underwent rapid genome downsizing, while genome sizes of ferns and gymnosperms remained unchanged. Smaller genomes—and smaller nuclei—allow for faster rates of cell division and smaller cells. Thus, species with smaller genomes can pack more, smaller cells—in particular veins and stomata—into a given leaf volume. Genome downsizing therefore facilitated higher rates of leaf gas exchange (transpiration and photosynthesis) and faster rates of growth. This would have countered some of the negative physiological effects of genome duplications, facilitated increased uptake of carbon dioxide despite concurrent declines in atmospheric CO concentrations, and allowed the flowering plants to outcompete other land plants.

The earliest known macrofossil confidently identified as an angiosperm, "Archaefructus liaoningensis", is dated to about 125 million years BP (the Cretaceous period), whereas pollen considered to be of angiosperm origin takes the fossil record back to about 130 million years BP, with "Montsechia" representing the earliest flower at that time. In 2018, scientists reported that the earliest flowers began about 180 million years ago, 50 million years earlier than thought earlier. Nonetheless, circumstantial chemical evidence has been found for the existence of angiosperms as early as 250 million years ago (see the above Paleozoic section)

In 2013 flowers encased in amber were found and dated 100 million years before present. The amber had frozen the act of sexual reproduction in the process of taking place. Microscopic images showed tubes growing out of pollen and penetrating the flower's stigma. The pollen was sticky, suggesting it was carried by insects. In August 2017, scientists presented a detailed description and 3D model image of what the first flower possibly looked like, and presented the hypothesis that it may have lived about 140 million years ago. A Bayesian analysis of 52 angiosperm taxa suggested that the crown group of angiosperms evolved between and .

Recent DNA analysis based on molecular systematics showed that "Amborella trichopoda", found on the Pacific island of New Caledonia, belongs to a sister group of the other flowering plants, and morphological studies suggest that it has features that may have been characteristic of the earliest flowering plants. The orders Amborellales, Nymphaeales, and Austrobaileyales diverged as separate lineages from the remaining angiosperm clade at a very early stage in flowering plant evolution.

The great angiosperm radiation, when a great diversity of angiosperms appears in the fossil record, occurred in the mid-Cretaceous (approximately 100 million years ago). However, a study in 2007 estimated that the division of the five most recent (the genus "Ceratophyllum", the family Chloranthaceae, the eudicots, the magnoliids, and the monocots) of the eight main groups occurred around 140 million years ago. It is generally assumed that the function of flowers, from the start, was to involve mobile animals in their reproduction processes. That is, pollen can be scattered even if the flower is not brightly colored or oddly shaped in a way that attracts animals; however, by expending the energy required to create such traits, angiosperms can enlist the aid of animals and, thus, reproduce more efficiently.

Island genetics provides one proposed explanation for the sudden, fully developed appearance of flowering plants. Island genetics is believed to be a common source of speciation in general, especially when it comes to radical adaptations that seem to have required inferior transitional forms. Flowering plants may have evolved in an isolated setting like an island or island chain, where the plants bearing them were able to develop a highly specialized relationship with some specific animal (a wasp, for example). Such a relationship, with a hypothetical wasp carrying pollen from one plant to another much the way fig wasps do today, could result in the development of a high degree of specialization in both the plant(s) and their partners. Note that the wasp example is not incidental; bees, which, it is postulated, evolved specifically due to mutualistic plant relationships, are descended from wasps.

Animals are also involved in the distribution of seeds. Fruit, which is formed by the enlargement of flower parts, is frequently a seed-dispersal tool that attracts animals to eat or otherwise disturb it, incidentally scattering the seeds it contains (see frugivory). Although many such mutualistic relationships remain too fragile to survive competition and to spread widely, flowering proved to be an unusually effective means of reproduction, spreading (whatever its origin) to become the dominant form of land plant life.

Flower ontogeny uses a combination of genes normally responsible for forming new shoots. The most primitive flowers probably had a variable number of flower parts, often separate from (but in contact with) each other. The flowers tended to grow in a spiral pattern, to be bisexual (in plants, this means both male and female parts on the same flower), and to be dominated by the ovary (female part). As flowers evolved, some variations developed parts fused together, with a much more specific number and design, and with either specific sexes per flower or plant or at least "ovary-inferior". Flower evolution continues to the present day; modern flowers have been so profoundly influenced by humans that some of them cannot be pollinated in nature. Many modern domesticated flower species were formerly simple weeds, which sprouted only when the ground was disturbed. Some of them tended to grow with human crops, perhaps already having symbiotic companion plant relationships with them, and the prettiest did not get plucked because of their beauty, developing a dependence upon and special adaptation to human affection.

A few paleontologists have also proposed that flowering plants, or angiosperms, might have evolved due to interactions with dinosaurs. One of the idea's strongest proponents is Robert T. Bakker. He proposes that herbivorous dinosaurs, with their eating habits, provided a selective pressure on plants, for which adaptations either succeeded in deterring or coping with predation by herbivores.

By the late Cretaceous, angiosperms appear to have dominated environments formerly occupied by ferns and cycadophytes, but large canopy-forming trees replaced conifers as the dominant trees only close to the end of the Cretaceous 66 million years ago or even later, at the beginning of the Tertiary. The radiation of herbaceous angiosperms occurred much later. Yet, many fossil plants recognizable as belonging to modern families (including beech, oak, maple, and magnolia) had already appeared by the late Cretaceous. Flowering plants appeared in Australia about 126 million years ago. This also pushed the age of ancient Australian vertebrates, in what was then a south polar continent, to 126-110 million years old.

The number of species of flowering plants is estimated to be in the range of 250,000 to 400,000. This compares to around 12,000 species of moss or 11,000 species of pteridophytes, showing that the flowering plants are much more diverse. The number of families in APG (1998) was 462. In APG II (2003) it is not settled; at maximum it is 457, but within this number there are 55 optional segregates, so that the minimum number of families in this system is 402. In APG III (2009) there are 415 families.

The diversity of flowering plants is not evenly distributed. Nearly all species belong to the eudicot (75%), monocot (23%), and magnoliid (2%) clades. The remaining 5 clades contain a little over 250 species in total; i.e. less than 0.1% of flowering plant diversity, divided among 9 families. The 43 most-diverse of 443 families of flowering plants by species, in their APG circumscriptions, are
Of these, the Orchidaceae, Poaceae, Cyperaceae, Araceae, Bromeliaceae, Arecaceae, and Iridaceae are monocot families; Piperaceae, Lauraceae, and Annonaceae are magnoliid dicots; the rest of the families are eudicots.

Double fertilization refers to a process in which two sperm cells fertilize cells in the ovule. This process begins when a pollen grain adheres to the stigma of the pistil (female reproductive structure), germinates, and grows a long pollen tube. While this pollen tube is growing, a haploid generative cell travels down the tube behind the tube nucleus. The generative cell divides by mitosis to produce two haploid ("n") sperm cells. As the pollen tube grows, it makes its way from the stigma, down the style and into the ovary. Here the pollen tube reaches the micropyle of the ovule and digests its way into one of the synergids, releasing its contents (which include the sperm cells). The synergid that the cells were released into degenerates and one sperm makes its way to fertilize the egg cell, producing a diploid (2"n") zygote. The second sperm cell fuses with both central cell nuclei, producing a triploid (3"n") cell. As the zygote develops into an embryo, the triploid cell develops into the endosperm, which serves as the embryo's food supply. The ovary will now develop into a fruit and the ovule will develop into a seed.

As the development of embryo and endosperm proceeds within the embryo sac, the sac wall enlarges and combines with the nucellus (which is likewise enlarging) and the integument to form the "seed coat". The ovary wall develops to form the fruit or pericarp, whose form is closely associated with type of seed dispersal system.

Frequently, the influence of fertilization is felt beyond the ovary, and other parts of the flower take part in the formation of the fruit, e.g., the floral receptacle in the apple, strawberry, and others.

The character of the seed coat bears a definite relation to that of the fruit. They protect the embryo and aid in dissemination; they may also directly promote germination. Among plants with indehiscent fruits, in general, the fruit provides protection for the embryo and secures dissemination. In this case, the seed coat is only slightly developed. If the fruit is dehiscent and the seed is exposed, in general, the seed-coat is well developed, and must discharge the functions otherwise executed by the fruit.

Flowering plants generate gametes using a specialized cell division called meiosis. Meiosis takes place in the ovule (a structure within the ovary that is located within the pistil at the center of the flower) (see diagram labeled "Angiosperm lifecycle"). A diploid cell (megaspore mother cell) in the ovule undergoes meiosis (involving two successive cell divisions) to produce four cells (megaspores) with haploid nuclei. It is thought that the basal chromosome number in angiosperms is n = 7. One of these four cells (megaspore) then undergoes three successive mitotic divisions to produce an immature embryo sac (megagametophyte) with eight haploid nuclei. Next, these nuclei are segregated into separate cells by cytokinesis to producing 3 antipodal cells, 2 synergid cells and an egg cell. Two polar nuclei are left in the central cell of the embryo sac.

Pollen is also produced by meiosis in the male anther (microsporangium). During meiosis, a diploid microspore mother cell undergoes two successive meiotic divisions to produce 4 haploid cells (microspores or male gametes). Each of these microspores, after further mitoses, becomes a pollen grain (microgametophyte) containing two haploid generative (sperm) cells and a tube nucleus. When a pollen grain makes contact with the female stigma, the pollen grain forms a pollen tube that grows down the style into the ovary. In the act of fertilization, a male sperm nucleus fuses with the female egg nucleus to form a diploid zygote that can then develop into an embryo within the newly forming seed. Upon germination of the seed, a new plant can grow and mature.

The adaptive function of meiosis is currently a matter of debate. A key event during meiosis in a diploid cell is the pairing of homologous chromosomes and homologous recombination (the exchange of genetic information) between homologous chromosomes. This process promotes the production of increased genetic diversity among progeny and the recombinational repair of damages in the DNA to be passed on to progeny. To explain the adaptive function of meiosis in flowering plants, some authors emphasize diversity and others emphasize DNA repair.

Apomixis (reproduction via asexually formed seeds) is found naturally in about 2.2% of angiosperm genera. One type of apomixis, gametophytic apomixis found in a dandelion species involves formation of an unreduced embryo sac due to incomplete meiosis (apomeiosis) and development of an embryo from the unreduced egg inside the embryo sac, without fertilization (parthenogenesis).

Agriculture is almost entirely dependent on angiosperms, which provide virtually all plant-based food, and also provide a significant amount of livestock feed. Of all the families of plants, the Poaceae, or grass family (providing grains), is by far the most important, providing the bulk of all feedstocks (rice, maize, wheat, barley, rye, oats, pearl millet, sugar cane, sorghum). The Fabaceae, or legume family, comes in second place. Also of high importance are the Solanaceae, or nightshade family (potatoes, tomatoes, and peppers, among others); the Cucurbitaceae, or gourd family (including pumpkins and melons); the Brassicaceae, or mustard plant family (including rapeseed and the innumerable varieties of the cabbage species "Brassica oleracea"); and the Apiaceae, or parsley family. Many of our fruits come from the Rutaceae, or rue family (including oranges, lemons, grapefruits, etc.), and the Rosaceae, or rose family (including apples, pears, cherries, apricots, plums, etc.).

In some parts of the world, certain single species assume paramount importance because of their variety of uses, for example the coconut ("Cocos nucifera") on Pacific atolls, and the olive ("Olea europaea") in the Mediterranean region.

Flowering plants also provide economic resources in the form of wood, paper, fiber (cotton, flax, and hemp, among others), medicines (digitalis, camphor), decorative and landscaping plants, and many other uses. The main area in which they are surpassed by other plants—namely, coniferous trees (Pinales), which are non-flowering (gymnosperms)—is timber and paper production.






</doc>
<doc id="1687359" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1687359" title="Primary succession">
Primary succession

Primary succession is one of two types of biological and ecological succession of plant life, occurring in an environment in which new substrate devoid of vegetation and other organisms usually lacking soil, such as a lava flow or area left from retreated glacier, is deposited . In other words, it is the gradual growth of an ecosystem over a longer period of time.

In contrast, secondary succession occurs on substrate that previously supported vegetation before an ecological disturbance from smaller things like floods, hurricanes, tornadoes, and fires which destroyed the plant life.

In primary succession pioneer species like lichen, algae and fungi as well as other abiotic factors like wind and water start to "normalize" the habitat. Primary succession begins on rock formations, such as volcanoes or mountains, or in a place with no organisms or soil. Primary succession leads to conditions nearer optimum for vascular plant growth; pedogenesis or the formation of soil, and the increased amount of shade are the most important processes. 
These pioneer lichen, algae, and fungi are then dominated and often replaced by plants better adapted to less harsh conditions, these plants include vascular plants like grasses and some shrubs that are able to live in thin soils that are often mineral based. Water and nutrient levels increase with the amount of succession exhibited. 

The early stages of primary succession are dominated by species with small propagules (seed and spores) which can be dispersed long distances. The early colonizers—often algae, fungi, and lichens—stabilize the substrate. Nitrogen supplies are limited in new soils, and nitrogen-fixing species tend to play an important role early in primary succession. Unlike in primary succession, the species that dominate secondary succession, are usually present from the start of the process, often in the soil seed bank. In some systems the successional pathways are fairly consistent, and thus, are easy to predict. In others, there are many possible pathways. For example, nitrogen-fixing legumes alter successional trajectories.

Spores of lichen or fungus, being the pioneer species, are spread onto a land of rocks. Then, the rocks are broken down into smaller particles. 
Organic matter gradually accumulates, favoring the growth of herbaceous plants like grass, ferns and herbs. These plants further improve the habitat by creating more organic matter when they die, and providing habitats for insects and other small animals. 
This leads to the occurrence of larger vascular plants like shrubs, or trees. More animals are then attracted to the area and a climax community is reached.

One good example of primary succession takes place after a volcano has erupted. The lava flows into the ocean and hardens into new land. The resulting barren land is first colonized by pioneer organisms, like algae, which pave the way for later, less hardy plants, such as hardwood trees, by facilitating pedogenesis, especially through the biotic acceleration of weathering and the addition of organic debris to the surface regolith. An example of this is the island of Surtsey, which is an island formed in 1963 after a volcanic eruption from beneath the sea. Surtsey is off the South coast of Iceland and is being monitored to observe primary succession in progress. About thirty species of plant had become established by 2008 and more species continue to arrive, at a typical rate of roughly 2–5 new species per year.

Another example takes place after a glacier in Signy Island, South Orkney Islands, Maritime Antarctic. Glacier retreat is becoming more normal with the warming climate, and lichens and mosses are the first colonizers. The study, conducted by Favero-Longo et al. found that lichen species diversity varies based on the environmental conditions of the previously existing earth that is first exposed and the lichens reproductive patterns. 



</doc>
<doc id="53570951" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53570951" title="Tasmanian coniferous shrubbery">
Tasmanian coniferous shrubbery

The vegetation in Tasmania's alpine environments is predominately woody and shrub-like. One vegetation type is coniferous shrubbery, characterised by the gymnosperm species "Microcachrys tetragona", "Pherosphaera hookeriana", "Podocarpus lawrencei", and "Diselma archeri". Distribution of these species is relevant with abiotic factors including edaphic conditions and fire frequency, and increasingly, the threat of climate change towards species survival exists. Conservation and management of coniferous shrubbery are necessary considering that the paleoendemic species, "Microcachrys," "Pherosphaera" and "Diselma", have persisted in western Tasmanian environments for millions of years.

These coniferous shrub species are restricted to subalpine and alpine heathlands in western Tasmania, with the exception of "Podocarpus lawrencei" which lives on the mainland. The alpine environments where these conifers occur have high levels of conifer endemism, which is an ecologically habitat for coniferous shrub species.

Coniferous shrub species can be observed in Mount Field National Park in Tasmania's south west along the Tarn Shelf. All species can be observed in rocky environments with shallow soil above .

Both the alpine environment and the harsh maritime climate have the pressures and limitations of wind exposure and ice abrasion for the woody and shrub-like habit of coniferous shrubbery. The lack of protective snow cover on Tasmanian mountains means that vegetation must be mechanically resistant to these elements, hence an ecologically habitat for coniferous shrub species. This is contrasted to alps of mainland Australia or New Zealand, where the presence of prolonged snow lie lead to the development of a grassland-herbland vegetation community.

Low productivity of the environment is indicated through the slow growth habit of the conifers, and the effects of fire are detrimental to the species. As well as this, physiological drought intolerance in conifers could influence the growth of vegetation considering the changing climate. The mosaic pattern of distribution is due to both fire history and the influence of precipitation and temperature. The exceptionally high species richness in subalpine vegetation is caused by this mosaic of vegetation communities.

Taxa that make up this vegetation type include:

The alpine vegetation of western Tasmania is associated with paleoendemic species, i.e. species that are old and geographically confined. "Microchachry"s"," "Pherosphaera" and "Diselma" are paleoendemic coniferous shrub clades of alpine western Tasmania. These clades were found on other southern hemisphere continents according to fossil, and they are restricted in their distribution. The environment they inhabit currently is not productive with infrequent fire, which is evident through the short and open canopy structure of the vegetation. Distribution of paleoendemic species gives insight into the similarities to environments in which ancestral lineages occurred and the current environmental characteristics allowing the species survival. Persistence of these species is due to natural selection, not dispersal limitation. The conservation of certain ecological characteristics promotes survival. The table below shows clade ages and scores of paleoendemism, which are calculated by dividing the age of the clade by the square root of the area of current occupancy. Scores of >500 m are considered high. 
Tasmania is one of 5 global hotspots for conifer diversity, with one of the highest rates of endemism in conifer flora in the world. The threats of climate change to Tasmanian coniferous shrubbery exist. Physical intolerance to drought and fire sensitivity are characteristic of the conifers and potential for distribution and recolonization is limited by ways of seed dispersal and slow growth rates.

In Tasmania, climate change is a rise in mean annual temperature, changed rainfall seasonality and weather events such as drought and fire. Dry lightning and drier soil conditions in western Tasmania pose a threat to coniferous shrubbery and other alpine vegetation types. The probability that extreme weather events cause that the extinction of species is higher than the effects of rise in temperature or rainfall.

For conservation of the Tasmanian coniferous shrubbery species, monitoring and prediction of climate events and refugia are fundamental. Field surveys and aerial photograph monitoring is in place in order to collect the required information. In order to reduce the risk of fire, 'fuel stove only areas' have been implemented in the Tasmanian Wilderness World Heritage Area, where the majority of Tasmanian coniferous shrubbery is located. These measures have been introduced in the hope of preventing the loss of conifer populations in both rainforest and alpine communities and to promote their survival into the foreseeable future.


</doc>
<doc id="60972435" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60972435" title="Metaphenomics">
Metaphenomics

Metaphenomics studies the phenome of plants or other organisms by means of meta-analysis. Main goal is to establish dose-response relationships of a wide range of phenotypic traits for a large set of a-biotic environmental factors.<br><br>

A popular way to study the effect of the environment on plants is to set up experiments where subgroups of individuals of a species of interest are exposed to different levels of one environmental factor (e.g. light, CO), while all other factors are similar. These studies have yielded a lot of insight into the way plants respond to the environment, but may be challenging to integrate by means of a classical meta-analysis. One of the reasons for that is that phenotypic traits often respond to the environment in a non-linear way. Rather than evaluating the difference between ‘low-CO’ and ‘high-CO’ grown plants, it would be better to derive dose-response curves which take into account at which CO2 levels experiments were carried out. Metaphenomics uses a method to calculate dose-response curves from a variety of experiments, and is applicable to any phenotypic trait and many environmental variables.<br>

Core of the method used in metaphenomics is to scale all phenotypic data for a given species or genotype across all the levels of the environmental variable of interest (say CO) to the value they have at a reference value of that environmental variable (for example, a CO concentration of 400 ppm). In this way, inherent variation among species or genotypes in the trait of interest is removed, as for all experiments and species, the scaled value at 400 ppm will be 1.0. Subsequently, general dose-response curves can be derived by fitting mathematical equations to the data.
The results generally are a family of curves where dose-response curves for one phenotypic trait are compared for a range of different environmental variables, or where many different phenotypic traits are analysed for their response to one environmental factor. This provides a simple and quantitative overview of the many ways plants or other organisms respond to their environmental.


</doc>
<doc id="60962435" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60962435" title="Photothermal ratio">
Photothermal ratio

The photothermal ratio (PTR), also named photothermal quotient, is a variable that characterizes the amount of light available to plants relative to the temperature level. It is used in plant biology to characterize the growth environment of plants.

Both light and temperature are important environmental variables that determine the growth and development of plants. Light is especially important in driving photosynthesis and producing sugars. Temperature is a strong driver of cell division, where available sugars are converted to produce new leaf, stem, root or reproductive biomass. As such, both are important factors – along with nutrient and water availability – in determining the source:sink balance of a plant, the amount of sugar available for plant in relation to its growth potential. The photothermal ratio is a quantitative descriptor that can be used to approximate this balance.

The photothermal ratio is calculated by dividing the Daily Light Integral (photosynthetic photon flux density integrated over a day; DLI) plants are exposed to by a baseline daily temperature(T). PTR = DLI / T. Units are therefore mol quanta m day °C. Alternatively, the number of degree days have been used rather than T per se, with units of the form mol degree-day. The PTR concept has been introduced in detailed studies of growth and productivity of a particular species. For these species, a baseline temperature T is chosen for which it is known than no leaf elongation takes place below that temperature, which for many temperate species will be a temperature around 5 °C.

In characterizing the growth environment of a broad range of plants without reference to any specific species, T has been taken to be zero °C.

The photothermal ratio is relatively constant over the year in the tropics, with lowland values around 1.3 mol m day °C. At higher latitudes PTR changes with seasons, being high in spring, and low in autumn. Averaged over the growing season, PTR values are around 3 in boreal zones, and around 2 in temperate zones. Plants growing in glasshouses often grow at a PTR of ~1, experiments with Arabidopsis are often carried out at a PTR around 0.2.

Many effects that have been ascribed to light are actually dependent on temperature as well. For example, strong stem elongation at low light will only take place when temperatures are high, but not when temperatures are close to 0 °C. In wheat, PTR in the month before anthesis strongly determines the number of kernels. In horticulture, plants grown at a high PTR generally have thicker stems, shorter internodes and more flowers, and therefore have higher marketable yield.



</doc>
<doc id="61708" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=61708" title="Shrub">
Shrub

A shrub or bush is a small- to medium-sized perennial woody plant. Unlike herbaceous plants, shrubs have persistent woody stems above the ground. They are distinguished from trees by their multiple stems and shorter height, less than 6 m-10 m (20 ft–33 ft) tall. Small shrubs, less than 2 m (6.6 ft) tall are sometimes termed subshrubs.

Shrubs are perennial woody plants, and therefore have persistent woody stems above ground (compare with herbaceous plants). Usually shrubs are distinguished from trees by their height and multiple stems. Some shrubs are deciduous (e.g. hawthorn) and others evergreen (e.g. holly). Ancient Greek philosopher Theophrastus divided the plant world into trees, shrubs and herbs.

Some definitions state that a shrub is less than 6 m and tree is over 6 m. Others use 10 m as the cut off point. Many species of tree may not reach this mature height because of less than ideal growing conditions, and resemble a shrub sized plant. However such species have the potential to grow taller under the ideal growing conditions for that plant.

Small, low shrubs, generally less than 2 m (6.6 ft) tall, such as lavender, periwinkle and most small garden varieties of rose, are often termed subshrubs.

Most definitions characterize shrubs as possessing multiple stems with no main trunk. This is because the stems have branched below ground level. There are exceptions to this, with some shrubs having main trunks, but these tend to be very short and divide into multiple stems close to ground level. Many trees can grow in multiple stemmed forms also, such as oak or ash.

An area of cultivated shrubs in a park or a garden is known as a shrubbery. When clipped as topiary, suitable species or varieties of shrubs develop dense foliage and many small leafy branches growing close together. Many shrubs respond well to renewal pruning, in which hard cutting back to a "stool" results in long new stems known as "canes". Other shrubs respond better to selective pruning to reveal their structure and character.

Shrubs in common garden practice are generally considered broad-leaved plants, though some smaller conifers such as mountain pine and common juniper are also shrubby in structure. Species that grow into a shrubby habit may be either deciduous or evergreen.

In botany and ecology, a shrub is more specifically used to describe the particular physical structural or plant life-form of woody plants which are less than high and usually have many stems arising at or near the base. For example, a descriptive system widely adopted in Australia is based on structural characteristics based on life-form, plus the height and amount of foliage cover of the tallest layer or dominant species.

For shrubs high the following structural forms are categorized:

For shrubs less than high the following structural forms are categorized:

Those marked with * can also develop into tree form.


</doc>
<doc id="503493" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=503493" title="Non-vascular plant">
Non-vascular plant

Non-vascular plants are plants without a vascular system consisting of xylem and phloem. Although non-vascular plants lack these particular tissues, many possess simpler tissues that are specialized for internal transport of water.

Non-vascular plants include two distantly related groups:

These groups are sometimes referred to as "lower plants", referring to their status as the earliest plant groups to evolve, but the usage is imprecise, since both groups are polyphyletic and may be used to include vascular cryptogams, such as the ferns and fern allies that reproduce using spores. Non-vascular plants are often among the first species to move into new and inhospitable territories, along with prokaryotes and protists, and thus function as pioneer species.

Non-vascular plants do not have a wide variety of specialized tissue types. Mosses and leafy liverworts have structures called phyllids that look like leaves, but are not true leaves because they are single sheets of cells with no internal air spaces, no cuticle or stomata and no xylem or phloem. Consequently, phyllids are unable to control the rate of water loss from their tissues and are said to be poikilohydric. Some liverworts, such as "Marchantia" have a cuticle and the sporophytes of mosses have both cuticles and stomata, which were important in the evolution of land plants.

All land plants have a life cycle with an alternation of generations between a diploid sporophyte and a haploid gametophyte, but in all non-vascular land plants the gametophyte generation is dominant. In these plants, the sporophytes grow from and are dependent on gametophytes for taking in water and mineral nutrients and for provision of photosynthate, the products of photosynthesis.


</doc>
<doc id="62904359" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62904359" title="Biliprotein">
Biliprotein

Biliproteins are pigment protein compounds that are located in photosynthesising organisms such as algae and certain insects. They refer to any protein that contains a bilin chromophore. In plants and algae, the main function of biliproteins is to make the process of light accumulation required for photosynthesis more efficient; while in insects they play a role in growth and development. Some of their properties: including light-receptivity, light-harvesting and fluorescence have made them suitable for applications in bioimaging and as indicators; while other properties such as anti-oxidation, anti-aging and anti-inflammation in phycobiliproteins have given them potential for use in medicine, cosmetics and food technology. While research on biliproteins dates back as far as 1950, it was hindered due to issues regarding biliprotein structure, lack of methods available for isolating individual biliprotein components, as well as limited information on lyase reactions (which are needed to join proteins with their chromophores).  Research on biliproteins has also been primarily focused on phycobiliproteins; but advances in technology and methodology, along with the discovery of different types of lyases, has renewed interest in biliprotein research, allowing new opportunities for investigating biliprotein processes such as assembly/disassembly and protein folding. 

Biliproteins found in plants and algae serve as a system of pigments whose purpose is to detect and absorb light needed for photosynthesis.  The absorption spectra of biliproteins complements that of other photosynthetic pigments such as chlorophyll or carotene.  The pigments detect and absorb energy from sunlight; the energy later being transferred to chlorophyll via internal energy transfer. According to a 2002 article written by Takashi Hirata et al., the chromophores of certain phycobiliproteins are responsible for antioxidant activities in these biliproteins, and phycocyanin also possesses anti-inflammatory qualities due to its inhibitory apoprotein. When induced by both collagen and adenosine triphosphate (ADP), the chromophore phycocyanobilin suppresses platelet aggregation in phycocyanin, its corresponding phycobiliprotein.

In insects, biliprotein lipocalins generally function to facilitate the changing of colours during camouflage, but other roles of biliproteins in insects have also been found. Functions such as preventing cellular damage, regulating guanylyl cyclase with biliverdin, among other roles associated with metabolic maintenance, have been hypothesised but yet to be proven. In the tobacco hornworm, the biliprotein insecticyanin (INS) was found to play a crucial part in embryonic development, as the absorption of INS into the moth eggs was observed.

The structure of biliproteins is typically characterised by bilin chromophores arranged in linear tetrapyrrolic formation, and the bilins are covalently bound to apoproteins via thioether bonds. Each type of biliprotein has a unique bilin that belongs to it (e.g. phycoerythrobilin is the chromophore of phycoerythrin and phycocyanobilin is the chromophore of phycocyanin). The bilin chromophores are formed by the oxidative cleavage of a haem ring and catalysed by haem oxygenases at one of four methine bridges, allowing four possible bilin isomers to occur. In all organisms known to have biliproteins, cleavage usually occurs at the α-bridge, generating biliverdin IXα. 

Phycobiliproteins are grouped together in separate clusters, approximately 40nm in diameter, known as phycobilisomes. The structural changes involved in deriving bilins from their biliverdin IXα isomer determine the spectral range of light absorption. 

The structure of biliproteins in insects differ slightly than those in plants and algae; they have a crystal structure and their chromophores are not covalently bound to the apoproteins. Unlike phycobiliproteins whose chromophores are held in an extended arrangement by specific interactions between chromophores and proteins, the chromophore in insect biliproteins has a cyclic helical crystal structure in the protein-bound state, as found in studies of the biliprotein extracted from the large white butterfly. 

Phycobiliproteins are found in cyanobacteria (also known as blue-green algae) and algae groups such as rhodophyta (red algae) and cryptophytes. Major phycobiliproteins include variations of phycocyanin (blue-pigment), variations of phycoerythrin (red pigment), and allophycocyanin (light-blue pigment); each of them possessing different spectral properties.  These water-soluble biliproteins are not essential for the functioning of cells. Some special qualities of phycobiliproteins include antioxidant properties and high fluorescence, and it is their chromophores that give these proteins their strong pigment. Phycobiliproteins are classified into two categories based on their amino-terminal sequences: "α-type" and "β-type" sequences. In biliproteins where the number of bilins on the two subunits is unequal, the subunit with more bilins has a β-type amino sequence.

Phycochromes are a subclass of phycobiliprotein that was initially recognised only as light sensory pigments in cyanobacteria. They are now deemed to constitute of all possible photoreversibly photochromic pigments, regardless of function. They are also found in red algae. In a series of journal articles written by G.S. and L.O. Björn, it was reported that phycochromes a, b, c and d were discovered by scientists who fractionated samples of blue-green algae using electrofocusing. The fractions with isoelectric points at or around 4.6 seemed analogous to phytochromes in that they possessed photochromic properties, yet were sensitive to light of shorter wavelengths. All four phycochromes except phycochrome c were extracted from the blue-green algae "Tolypothrix distorta"; whereas phycochrome a was also found in "Phormidium luridum", "Nostoc muscorum" 1453/12 and "Anacystis nidulans"; and phycochrome c was extracted from "Nostoc muscorum" A and "Tolypothrix tenuis". 

Phytochromes (also known as phys) were initially discovered in green plants in 1945. The photoreversible pigment was later found in fungi, mosses, and other algae groups due to the development of whole-genome sequencing, as explained in Peter H. Quail's 2010 journal article "Phytochromes".  As described in Hugo Scheer's 1981 journal article "Biliproteins," phytochromes function as a sensor of light intensity in ‘high-energy’ reactions, i.e. in higher plants (e.g. underground seedlings), during transformation of heterotrophic blanching growth to autotrophic photosynthetic growth. They carry out this function by monitoring the various parameters of light signals (such as presence/absence, colour, intensity and photoperiodicity). This information is then transduced via intracellular signaling pathways that trigger responses specific to the organism and its development state on both cellular and molecular levels, as explained by Quail. Phytochromes are also responsible for regulating many aspects of a plant's growth, development and reproduction throughout its lifecycle.

The lipocalins that have been identified as biliproteins have been found in a wide variety of insects, but mainly in the order Lepidoptera. Scientists have discovered them in the large white butterfly and a number of moth and silkmoth species, including the ailanthus and domestic silkmoths, giant silkworm moth, tobacco hawk moth, honeycomb moth, and the puss moth. The biliproteins associated with these insect species are the bilin-binding proteins, biliverdin-binding proteins, bombyrin, lipocalins 1 and 4, insecticyanin, gallerin and CV-bilin respectively. The biliproteins found in the tobacco hawk moth and pussmoth make up a major part of the insects’ haemolymph fluids.

The biliproteins that have been found in other insect orders apart from Lepidoptera still have unknown sequences, and so their lipocalin nature is still open.

In a 1988 study conducted by Hugo Scheer and Harmut Kayser, biliproteins were extracted from the large white butterfly and puss moth and their respective properties were examined.  Their properties were compared to those of plant and algae biliproteins, and their distinguishing features were taken into account. 

Unlile plant and algae biliproteins whose bilins are generally only derived from the IXα biliverdin isomer, the bilins of insect biliproteins are also derived from the IXγ isomer, which is almost exclusively found in Lepidoptera. The study cited from M. Bois-Choussy and M. Barbier that these IXγ-series bile pigments are derived from cleavage of the porphyrin precursors at the C-15 (formerly γ) methine bridge, which is uncharacteristic of other mammalian and plant biliproteins. When the scientists examined biliproteins from both the large white butterfly and puss moth, they found that their polypeptides had a low α-helix content in comparison to phycobiliproteins. 

It was hypothesised that the role of biliproteins in insects would also have a role related to light-absorption similar to that in plant and algae biliproteins. However, when the photochemical properties required for light-absorption were found absent in the biliprotein of the large white butterfly, this hypothesis was eliminated, followed by the assumption that those photochemical properties also do not occur in any other insect biliproteins.

Based on these examinations, it was concluded that insect biliproteins are only loosely related to those from plants and algae, due to the large number of differences they have regarding structure, chemical composition, derivation of bilins and general functions.

Fluorescent proteins have had a substantial impact on bioimaging, which is why biliproteins have made suitable candidates for the application, due to their properties of fluorescence, light-harvesting, light-sensitivity and photoswitching (the latter occurring only in phytochromes). Phycobiliproteins, which are highly fluorescent, have been used in external applications of bioimaging since the early 1980s. That application requires the bilin chromophore to be synthesised from haem, after which a lyase is needed to covalently bond the bilin to its corresponding apoprotein. An alternative method of uses phytochromes instead; some phytochromes only require one enzyme, haem oxygenase, for synthesisng chromophores. Another benefit of using phytochromes is that they bind to their bilins autocatalytically. While there are photochromic pigments with poor fluorescence, this problem has been alleviated by engineering protein variants that reduce photochemistry and enhance fluorescence.

Properties of phycobiliproteins, such as their natural antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, food colourant, strong pigment and anti-aging activities, have given them considerable potential for use in food, cosmetics and medicinal applications. They have also proven to be therapeutic in treating diseases such as Alzheimer's disease and cancer. Given their large range of applications and potential uses, researchers have been trying to find and develop ways to produce and purify phycobiliproteins to meet the growing demand for them. One such phycobiliprotein is C-phycocyanin (C-PC), which is found in spirulina. A limiting factor of C-PC's usage in these applications is its protein stability, given that in its natural form, C-PC is highly sensitive to light and heat when in aqueous solution, due to its photosensitive phycocyanobilin (PCB) chromophore, which also makes it prone to free-radical oxidation. Like other natural food colourants, C-PC is also sensitive to acidic conditions and oxidant exposure. This has prompted studies to develop methods of stabilising C-PC/PCB and expand their applications to other food systems.

More details on the applications of phycocyanin in food and medicine can be found here.

The fluorescence signals emitted from phycoerythrin and phycocyanin have made them suitable for use as indicators to detect cyanotoxins such as microcystins in drinking water. A study examined the nature of the biliproteins' fluorescence signals regarding their real-time character, sensitivity and the biliproteins' behaviour in different treatment stages (of water) in comparison to microcystins. The fluorescence signals' real-time character was confirmed by fluorescence measurements, as they can be carried out without having to pre-concentrate the biliproteins. If the ratio of biliprotein to microcystin is above 1, the fluorescence signals can estimate very low concentrations of microcystins. A test conducted in 2009 compared the behaviour of both biliproteins and selected microcystins MC-LR and MC-RR during water treatment. The test results showed that the biliproteins have an early warning function against microcystins in conventional treatment stages that use pre-oxidation with permanganate, activated carbon and chlorination. However, the early warning function does not occur when chlorine dioxide is used as a pre-oxidant or final disinfectant. It is important for the biliprotein/toxin ratio of raw water to be known in order to use the biliproteins for control measurements in drinking water treatment.




</doc>
<doc id="1110607" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1110607" title="Bacterial oxidation">
Bacterial oxidation

Bacteria biooxidation is an oxidation process caused by microbes where the valuable metal remains (but becomes enriched) in the solid phase. In this process, the metal remains in the solid phase and the liquid can be discarded.
Bacterial oxidation is a biohydrometallurgical process developed for pre-cyanidation treatment of refractory gold ores or concentrates. The bacterial culture is a mixed culture of "Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans", "Acidithiobacillus thiooxidans" and "Leptospirillum ferrooxidans". The bacterial oxidation process comprises contacting refractory sulfide ROM ore or concentrate with a strain of the bacterial culture for a suitable treatment period under an optimum operating environment. The bacteria oxidise the sulfide minerals, thus liberating the occluded gold for subsequent recovery via cyanidation.

The BIOX® process is a proprietary technology owned by Biomin South Africa and used under licence by a number of operating mines. The BIOX® process involves bacterial oxidation in agitated tanks for pre-treatment of refractory ores and concentrates ahead of conventional cyanide leach for gold recovery.

Under controlled continuous plant conditions, the number of bacterial cells and their activity is optimised to attain the highest rate of sulfide oxidation. The bacteria require a very acidic environment (pH 1.0 to 4.0), a temperature of between 30 and 45 °C, and a steady supply of oxygen and carbon dioxide for optimum growth and activity. The unusual operating conditions for the bacteria are not favourable for the growth of most other microbes, thus eliminating the need for sterility during the bacterial oxidation process. Because organic substances are toxic to the bacteria, they are non-pathogenic and incapable of causing disease. The bacteria employed in the process do not, therefore, pose a health risk to humans or any animals.

The bacterial oxidation of iron sulfide minerals produces iron(III) sulfate and sulfuric acid, and in the case of arsenopyrite, arsenic acid is also produced. The arsenic is removed from the liquor by coprecipitation with the iron and sulfate in a two-stage neutralisation process. This produces a solid neutralisation precipitate containing largely calcium sulfate, basic iron(III) arsenate and iron(III) hydroxide. The iron(III) arsenate is sufficiently insoluble and stable to allow the neutralisation product to be safely disposed of on a slimes dam. The neutralisation liquor, purified to contain an acceptable level of arsenic, can be re-used in the milling, flotation or bacterial oxidation circuits.




</doc>
<doc id="983400" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=983400" title="L ring">
L ring

The L-ring of the bacterial flagellum is the ring in the lipid outer cell membrane through which the axial filament (rod, hook, and flagellum) passes.


</doc>
<doc id="1240502" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1240502" title="Scotochromogenic">
Scotochromogenic

Scotochromogenic bacteria develop pigment in the dark. Runyon Group II nontuberculous mycobacteria are examples but the term could apply to many other organisms.


</doc>
<doc id="1984978" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1984978" title="Acetogen">
Acetogen

An acetogen is a microorganism that generates acetate (CHCOO) as an end product of anaerobic respiration or fermentation. However, this term is usually employed in a more narrow sense only to those bacteria and archaea that perform anaerobic respiration and carbon fixation simultaneously through the reductive acetyl coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA) pathway (also known as the Wood-Ljungdahl pathway). These genuine acetogens are also known as "homoacetogens" and they can produce acetyl-CoA (and from that, in most cases, acetate as the end product) from two molecules of carbon dioxide (CO) and four molecules of molecular hydrogen (H). This process is known as acetogenesis, and is different from acetate fermentation, although both occur in the absence of molecular oxygen (O) and produce acetate. Although previously thought that only bacteria are acetogens, some archaea can be considered to be acetogens.

Acetogens are found in a variety of habitats, generally those that are anaerobic (lack oxygen). Acetogens can use a variety of compounds as sources of energy and carbon; the best studied form of acetogenic metabolism involves the use of carbon dioxide as a carbon source and hydrogen as an energy source. Carbon dioxide reduction is carried out by the key enzyme acetyl-CoA synthase. Together with methane-forming archaea, acetogens constitute the last limbs in the anaerobic food web that leads to the production of methane from polymers in the absence of oxygen. Acetogens may represent ancestors of the first bioenergetically active cells in evolution.

Acetogens have diverse metabolic roles, which help them thrive in different environments. One of their metabolic products is acetate which is an important nutrient for the host and its inhabiting microbial community, most seen in termite's guts. Acetogens also serve as "hydrogen sinks" in termite's GI tract. Hydrogen gas inhibits biodegradation and acetogens use up these hydrogen gases in the anaerobic environment to favor the biodegradative capacity of the host by reacting hydrogen gas and carbon dioxide to make acetate. Acetogens have the ability to use variety of substrates in an event where another competitor such as a methanogen makes hydrogen gas a limiting substrate. Acetogens can use and convert alcohols, lactates and fatty acids, which are usually restricted to syntrophs, instead of just carbon dioxide and hydrogen. This enables them to take on the roles of important contributors of food chain such as primary fermenters. Acetogens can work together with methanogens, as exemplified by the conversion of carbohydrates by a Methanosarcina barkeri and coculture of A. woodii. The methanogen takes up acetate to favor the acetogen. Sometimes the interspecies transfer of hydrogen gas between A. woodii and an H-consuming methanogen results in hydrogen gas being released from the acetogen instead of going toward acetogenesis by the Wood–Ljungdahl pathway. Acetogens are also one of the contributors to corrosion of steel. Acetobacterium woodii utilize hydrogen gas and CO to make the acetate that is used as carbon source for many of the sulfate-reducing bacteria growing with hydrogen gas and sulfate.


</doc>
<doc id="496297" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=496297" title="Spheroplast">
Spheroplast

A spheroplast (or sphaeroplast in British usage) is a microbial cell from which the cell wall has been almost completely removed, as by the action of penicillin or lysozyme. According to some definitions, the term is used to describe Gram-negative bacteria. According to other definitions, the term also encompasses yeasts. The name spheroplast stems from the fact that after the microbe's cell wall is digested, membrane tension causes the cell to acquire a characteristic spherical shape. Spheroplasts are osmotically fragile, and will lyse if transferred to a hypotonic solution.

When used to describe Gram-negative bacteria, the term spheroplast refers to cells from which the peptidoglycan component but not the outer membrane component of the cell wall has been removed.

Various antibiotics convert Gram-negative bacteria into spheroplasts. These include peptidoglycan synthesis inhibitors such as fosfomycin, vancomycin, moenomycin, lactivicin and the β-lactam antibiotics. Antibiotics that inhibit biochemical pathways directly upstream of peptidoglycan synthesis induce spheroplasts too (eg. fosmidomycin, phosphoenolpyruvate).

In addition to the above antibiotics, inhibitors of protein synthesis (eg. chloramphenicol, oxytetracycline, several aminoglycosides) and inhibitors of folic acid synthesis (eg. trimethoprim, sulfamethoxazole) also cause Gram-negative bacteria to form spheroplasts.

The enzyme lysozyme causes Gram-negative bacteria to form spheroplasts, but only if a membrane permeabilizer such as lactoferrin or ethylenediaminetetraacetate (EDTA) is used to ease the enzyme’s passage through the outer membrane. EDTA acts as a permeabilizer by binding to divalent ions such as Ca and removing them from the outer membrane.

The yeast "Candida albicans" can be converted to spheroplasts using the enzymes lyticase, chitinase and β-glucuronidase.

From the 1960s into the 1990s, Merck and Co. used a spheroplast screen as a primary method for discovery of antibiotics that inhibit cell wall biosynthesis. In this screen devised by Eugene Dulaney, growing bacteria were exposed to test substances under hypertonic conditions. Inhibitors of cell wall synthesis caused growing bacteria to form spheroplasts. This screen enabled the discovery of fosfomycin, cephamycin C, thienamycin and several carbapenems.

Specially prepared giant spheroplasts of Gram-negative bacteria can be used to study the function of bacterial ion channels through a technique called patch clamp, which was originally designed for characterizing the behavior of neurons and other excitable cells. To prepare giant spheroplasts, bacteria are treated with a septation inhibitor (eg. cephalexin). This causes the bacteria to form filaments, elongated cells that lack internal cross-walls. After a period of time, the cell walls of the filaments are digested, and the bacteria collapse into very large spheres surrounded by just their cytoplasmic and outer membranes. The membranes can then be analyzed on a patch clamp apparatus to determine the phenotype of the ion channels embedded in it. It is also common to overexpress a particular channel to amplify its effect and make it easier to characterize.

The technique of patch clamping giant "E. coli" spheroplasts has been used to study the native mechanosensitive channels (MscL, MscS, and MscM) of "E. coli". It has been extended to study other heterologously expressed ion channels and it has been shown that the giant "E. coli" spheroplast can be used as an ion-channel expression system comparable to the "Xenopus" oocyte.

Yeast cells are normally protected by a thick cell wall which makes extraction of cellular proteins difficult. Enzymatic digestion of the cell wall with zymolyase, creating spheroplasts, renders the cells vulnerable to easy lysis with detergents or rapid osmolar pressure changes.

Bacterial spheroplasts, with suitable recombinant DNA inserted into them, can be used to transfect animal cells. Spheroplasts with recombinant DNA are introduced into the media containing animal cells and are fused by polyethylene glycol (PEG). With this method, nearly 100% of the animal cells may take up the foreign DNA. Upon conducting experiments following a modified Hanahan protocol using calcium chloride in "E. coli", it was determined that spheroplasts may be able to transform at 4.9x10.



</doc>
<doc id="4000065" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4000065" title="Luminescent bacteria">
Luminescent bacteria

Luminescent bacteria emit light as the result of a chemical reaction during which chemical energy is converted to light energy. Luminescent bacteria exist as symbiotic organisms carried within a larger organism, such as many deep sea organisms, including the Lantern Fish, the Angler fish, certain jellyfish, certain clams and the Gulper eel. The light is generated by an enzyme-catalyzed chemoluminescence reaction, wherein the pigment luciferin is oxidised by the enzyme luciferase. The expression of genes related to bioluminescence is controlled by an operon called the lux operon.

Some species of luminescent bacteria possess quorum sensing, the ability to determine local population by the concentration of chemical messengers. Species which have quorum sensing can turn on and off certain chemical pathways, commonly luminescence; in this way, once population levels reach a certain point the bacteria switch on light-production

Bioluminescence is a form of luminescence, or "cold light" emission; less than 20% of the light generates thermal radiation. It should not be confused with fluorescence, phosphorescence or refraction of light. Most forms of bioluminescence are brighter (or only exist) at night, following a circadian rhythm.




</doc>
<doc id="2893267" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2893267" title="Diplococcus">
Diplococcus

A diplococcus (plural diplococci) is a round bacterium (a coccus) that typically occurs in the form of two joined cells. 

Examples of gram-negative diplococci are "Neisseria spp." and "Moraxella catarrhalis." Examples of gram-positive diplococci are "Streptococcus pneumoniae" and "Enterococcus" spp. 
Presumably, diplococcus has been implicated in encephalitis lethargica.

Phylum: Proteobacteria

Class: Betaproteobacteria

Order: Neisseriales

Family: Neisseriaceae

Genus: "Neisseria"

The genus "Neisseria" belongs to the family Neisseriaceae. This genus, "Neisseria," is divided into more than ten different species, but most of them are gram negative and coccoid. The gram-negative, coccoid species include: "Neisseria cinerea, Neisseria gonorrhoeae, Neisseria polysaccharea", "Neisseria lactamica", "Neisseria meningitidis", "Neisseria mucosa", "Neisseria oralis and Neisseria subflava." Of these "Neisseria species," the most common, pathogenic species are "N. meningitidis" and "N.gonorrhoeae." 

Phylum: Proteobacteria

Class: Gammaproteobacteria

Order: Pseudomonadales

Family: Moraxellaceae

Genus: "Moraxella"

The genus "Moraxella" belongs to the family "Moraxellaceae." This genus, "Moraxellaceae," comprises gram-negative coccobacilli bacteria: "Moraxella lacunata, Moraxella atlantae, Moraxella boevrei, Moraxella bovis, Moraxella canis, Moraxella caprae, Moraxella caviae, Moraxella cuniculi, Moraxella equi, Moraxella lincolnii, Moraxella nonliquefaciens, Moraxella osloensis, Moraxella ovis and Moraxella saccharolytica, Moraxella pluranimalium". However, only one has a morphology of diplococcus, "Moraxella catarrhalis. M. catarrhalis" is a salient pathogen contributing to infections in the human body.

Phylum: Firmicutes

Class: Bacilli

Order: Lactobacillales

Family: Streptococcaceae

Genus: Streptococcus

Species: "Streptococcus pneumoniae"

The species "Streptococcus pneumoniae" belongs to the genus "Streptococcus" and the family "Streptococcaceae." The genus "Streptococcus" has around 129 species and 23 subspeciesthat benefit to many micrbiomes on the human body. There are many species that show non-pathogenic characteristics; however, there are some, like "S. pneumoniae," that exhibit pathogenic characteristics in the human body.

Phylum: Firmicutes

Class: Bacilli

Order: Lactobacillales

Family: Enterococcaceae

Genus: "Enterococcus"

The genus "Enterococcus" belongs to the family "Enterococcaceae." This genus is divided into 58 species and two subspecies. These gram-positive, coccoid bacteria were once thought to be harmless to the human body. However, within the last ten years, there has been an influx of nosocomial pathogens originating from "Enterococcus" bacteria.

Many of these diplococci bacteria have species (strains) exhibit pathogenic characteristics. Examples of gram-negative, diplococci pathogens would be "N.gonorrhoeae" and "N. meningitidis." "N. gonorrhea" is transmitted through copulation with a person who is infected. This bacterium embeds in the reproductive tract tissue in women, causing cervical and uterine infections. Once the membranous tissues within the fallopian tubes are infected, complications in pregnancies will arise. In men, this bacterium infects the urethra. Testing on male subjects, showed apparent bacteria forming colonies within the epithelium and exhibiting signs of damage in these cells. "N. meningitidis," also known as meningococcus, can cause bacterial infections on/in the body, i.e. lungs, nasopharynx, or skin, which eventually enters the bloodstream. (web arch) The malignant bacteria within the bloodstream burgeon and often ends in fatality if extreme enough. Another example of a gram-negative, diplococci pathogen is "Moraxella catarrhalis." A study of "M. catarrhalis" was conducted on 58 cases and all presented similar, yet different results. Many cases appeared to have infections within the body: pharyngitis, tracheitis, sinusitis, bronchitis, and otitis. Few showed chracteristics of meningitis, endocarditis, and septic arthritis. 

Examples of gram-positive, diplococci pathogens include S"treptococcus pneumoniae" and some species in "Enterococcus" bacteria. S"treptococcus pneumoniae" infects the human anatomy in the respiratory tract and the immune system. This bacteria congregates at the end of the bronchial tubes in the alveoli, which elicits an inflammatory results. Then, this elicited response fills with blood and all its components fill the alveoli; resulting in pneumonia. "Enterococcus" has given rise to Entercoccal meningitis, an uncommon nosocomial disease. These nosocomial infections also affect the urinary tract and post-surgical wounds, still healing.


</doc>
<doc id="3382387" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3382387" title="Magnetotactic bacteria">
Magnetotactic bacteria

Magnetotactic bacteria (or MTB) are a polyphyletic group of bacteria that orient themselves along the magnetic field lines of Earth's magnetic field. Discovered in 1963 by Salvatore Bellini and rediscovered in 1975 by Richard Blakemore, this alignment is believed to aid these organisms in reaching regions of optimal oxygen concentration. To perform this task, these bacteria have organelles called magnetosomes that contain magnetic crystals. The biological phenomenon of microorganisms tending to move in response to the environment's magnetic characteristics is known as magnetotaxis. However, this term is misleading in that every other application of the term taxis involves a stimulus-response mechanism. In contrast to the magnetoreception of animals, the bacteria contain fixed magnets that force the bacteria into alignment—even dead cells are dragged into alignment, just like a compass needle.

The first description of magnetotactic bacteria was in 1963 by Salvatore Bellini of the University of Pavia. While observing bog sediments under his microscope, Bellini noticed a group of bacteria that evidently oriented themselves in a unique direction. He realized these microorganisms moved according to the direction of the North Pole, and hence called them "magnetosensitive bacteria". The publications were academic (peer-reviewed by the "Istituto di Microbiologia"'s editorial committee under responsibility of the Institute´s Director Prof. L. Bianchi, as usual in European universities at the time) and communicated in Italian with English, French and German short summaries in the official journal of a well-known institution, yet unexplainedly seem to have attracted little attention until they were brought to the attention of Richard Frankel in 2007. Frankel translated them into English and the translations were published in the "Chinese Journal of Oceanography and Limnology".

Richard Blakemore, then a Microbiology graduate student at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst, working in the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in whose collections the pertinent publications of the Institute of Microbiology of the University of Pavia were extant, observed microorganisms following the direction of Earth's magnetic field. Blakemore did not mention Bellini's research in his own report, which he published in "Science", but was able to observe magnetosome chains using an electron microscope. Bellini's terms for this behavior, namely , or , and (Bellini's first publication, last page), went forgotten, and Blakemore's "magnetotaxis" was adopted by the scientific community.

These bacteria have been the subject of many experiments. They have even been aboard the Space Shuttle to examine their magnetotactic properties in the absence of gravity, but a definitive conclusion was not reached.

The sensitivity of magnetotactic bacteria to the Earth's magnetic field arises from the fact these bacteria precipitate chains of crystals of magnetic minerals within their cells. , all magnetotactic bacteria are reported to precipitate either magnetite or greigite. These crystals, and sometimes the chains of crystals, can be preserved in the geological record as magnetofossils. The oldest unambiguous magnetofossils come from the Cretaceous chalk beds of southern England, though less certain reports of magnetofossils extend to 1.9 billion years old Gunflint Chert. There have also been claims of their existence on Mars based on the shape of magnetite particles within the Martian meteorite ALH84001, but these claims are highly contested.

Several different morphologies (shapes) of MTB exist, differing in number, layout and pattern of the bacterial magnetic particles (BMPs) they contain. The MTBs can be subdivided into two categories, according to whether they produce particles of magnetite () or of greigite (), although some species are capable of producing both. Magnetite possesses a magnetic moment with three times the magnitude of greigite.

Magnetite-producing magnetotactic bacteria are usually found in an oxic-anoxic transition zone (OATZ), the transition zone between oxygen-rich and oxygen-starved water or sediment. Many MTB are able to survive only in environments with very limited oxygen, and some can exist only in completely anaerobic environments. It has been postulated that the evolutionary advantage of possessing a system of magnetosomes is linked to the ability to efficiently navigate within this zone of sharp chemical gradients by simplifying a potential three-dimensional search for more favorable conditions to a single dimension. (See for a description of this mechanism.) Some types of magnetotactic bacteria can produce magnetite even in anaerobic conditions, using nitric oxide, nitrate, or sulfate as a final acceptor for electrons. The greigite mineralizing MTBs are usually strictly anaerobic.

It has been suggested MTB evolved in the early Archean Eon, as the increase in atmospheric oxygen meant that there was an evolutionary advantage for organisms to have magnetic navigation. Magnetosomes first evolved as a defense mechanism in response to the increase of reactive oxygen species (ROS) that resulted from The Great Oxygenation Event. Organisms began to store iron in some form, and this intracellular iron was later adapted to form magnetosomes for magnetotaxis. These early MTB may have participated in the formation of the first eukaryotic cells. Biogenic magnetite similar to that found in magnetotactic bacteria has been also found in higher organisms, from euglenoid algae to trout. Reports in humans and pigeons are far less advanced.

Magnetotactic bacteria organize their magnetosomes in linear chains. The magnetic dipole moment of the cell is therefore the sum of the dipole moment of each BMP, which is then sufficient to passively orient the cell and overcome the casual thermal forces found in a water environment. In the presence of more than one chain, the inter-chain repulsive forces will push these structures to the edge of the cell, inducing turgor.

Nearly all of the genes relevant to magnetotaxis in MTB are located in an approximately 80 kilobase region in the genome called the magnetosome island. There are three main operons in the magnetosome island: the mamAB operon, the mamGFDC operon, and the mms6 operon. There are 9 genes that are essential for the formation and function of modern magnetosomes: mamA, mamB, mamE, mamI, mamK, mamM, mamO, mamP, and mamQ. In addition to these 9 genes that are well conserved across all MTB, there are more than 30 total genes that contribute to magnetotaxis in MTB. These non-essential genes account for the variation in magnetite/greigite crystal size and shape, as well as the specific alignment of magnetosomes in the cell.

The diversity of MTB is reflected by the high number of different morphotypes found in environmental samples of water or sediment. Commonly observed morphotypes include spherical or ovoid cells (cocci), rod-shaped (bacilli), and spiral bacteria of various dimensions. One of the more distinctive morphotypes is an apparently multicellular bacterium referred to as the many-celled magnetotactic prokaryote (MMP).

Regardless of their morphology, all MTB studied so far are motile by means of flagella and are gram-negative bacteria of various phyla. Despite the majority of known species' being proteobacteria, e.g. "Magnetospirillum magneticum" an alphaproteobacterium, members of various phyla possess the magnetosome gene cluster, such as "Candidatus Magnetobacterium bavaricum" a Nitrospira. The arrangement of flagella differs and can be polar, bipolar, or in tufts. The first phylogenetic analysis on magnetotactic bacteria using 16S rRNA gene sequence comparisons was performed by P. Eden et al. in 1991.

Another trait that shows considerable diversity is the arrangement of magnetosomes inside the bacterial cell. In the majority of MTB, the magnetosomes are aligned in chains of various lengths and numbers along the cell's long axis, which is magnetically the most efficient orientation. However, dispersed aggregates or clusters of magnetosomes occur in some MTB, usually at one side of the cell, which often corresponds to the site of flagellar insertion. Besides magnetosomes, large inclusion bodies containing elemental sulfur, polyphosphate, or poly-β-hydroxybutyrate are common in MTB.

The most abundant type of MTB occurring in environmental samples, especially sediments, are coccoid cells possessing two flagellar bundles on a somewhat flattened side. This "bilophotrichous" type of flagellation gave rise to the tentative genus "Bilophococcus" for these bacteria. In contrast, two of the morphologically more conspicuous MTB, regularly observed in natural samples, but never isolated in pure culture, are the MMP and a large rod containing copious amounts of hook-shaped magnetosomes ("Magnetobacterium bavaricum").

The physical development of a magnetic crystal is governed by two factors: one is moving to align the magnetic force of the molecules in conjunction with the developing crystal, while the other reduces the magnetic force of the crystal, allowing an attachment of the molecule while experiencing an opposite magnetic force. In nature, this causes the existence of a magnetic domain, surrounding the perimeter of the domain, with a thickness of approximately 150nm of magnetite, within which the molecules gradually change orientation. For this reason, the iron is not magnetic in the absence of an applied field. Likewise, extremely small magnetic particles do not exhibit signs of magnetisation at room temperature; their magnetic force is continuously altered by the thermal motions inherent in their composition. Instead, individual magnetite crystals in MTB are of a size between 35 and 120nm, that is; large enough to have a magnetic field and at the same time small enough to remain a single magnetic domain.

The inclination of the Earth's magnetic field in the two respective hemispheres selects one of the two possible polarities of the magnetotactic cells (with respect to the flagellated pole of the cell), orienting the biomineralisation of the magnetosomes.

Aerotaxis is the response by which bacteria migrate to an optimal oxygen concentration in an oxygen gradient. Various experiments have clearly shown that magnetotaxis and aerotaxis work in conjunction in magnetotactic bacteria. It has been shown that, in water droplets, one-way swimming magnetotactic bacteria can reverse their swimming direction and swim backwards under reducing conditions (less than optimal oxygen concentration), as opposed to oxic conditions (greater than optimal oxygen concentration). The behaviour that has been observed in these bacterial strains has been referred to as magneto-aerotaxis.

Two different magneto-aerotactic mechanisms—known as polar and axial—are found in different MTB strains. Some strains that swim persistently in one direction along the magnetic field (either north-seeking [NS] or south-seeking [SS])—mainly the magnetotactic cocci—are polar magneto-aerotactic. These magnetotactic bacteria will travel along the lines of the earth's magnetic field according to their orientation, but will swerve as a group and reverse direction if exposed to a local, more powerful and oppositely-oriented magnetic field. In this way, they continue to travel in the same magnetic direction, but relative instead to the local field. Those MTB that swim in either direction along magnetic field lines with frequent, spontaneous reversals of swimming direction without turning around—for example, freshwater spirilla—are axial magneto-aerotactic and the distinction between NS and SS does not apply to these bacteria. The magnetic field provides both an axis and a direction of motility for polar magneto-aerotactic bacteria, whereas it only provides an axis of motility for axial types of bacteria. In both cases, magnetotaxis increases the efficiency of aerotaxis in vertical concentration gradients by reducing a three-dimensional search to a single dimension.

Scientists have also proposed an extension of the described model of magneto-aerotaxis to a more complex redoxtaxis. In this case, the unidirectional movement of MTB in a drop of water would be only one aspect of a sophisticated redox-controlled response. One hint for the possible function of polar magnetotaxis could be that most of the representative microorganisms are characterised by possessing either large sulfur inclusions or magnetosomes consisting of iron-sulfides. Therefore, it may be speculated the metabolism of these bacteria, being either chemolithoautotrophic or mixotrophic, is strongly dependent on the uptake of reduced sulfur compounds, which occurs in many habitats only in deeper regions at or below the OATZ due to the rapid chemical oxidation of these reduced chemical species by oxygen or other oxidants in the upper layers.

Microorganisms belonging to the genus "Thioploca", for example, use nitrate, which is stored intracellularly, to oxidize sulfide, and have developed vertical sheaths in which bundles of motile filaments are located. It is assumed that "Thioploca" uses these sheathes to move efficiently in a vertical direction in sediment, thereby accumulating sulfide in deeper layers and nitrate in upper layers. For some MTB, it might also be necessary to perform excursions to anoxic zones of their habitat to accumulate reduced sulfur compounds.

The biomineralisation of magnetite () requires regulating mechanisms to control the concentration of iron, the crystal nucleation, the redox potential and the acidity (pH). This is achieved by means of compartmentalisation in structures known as magnetosomes that allow the biochemical control of the above-mentioned processes. After the genome of several MTB species had been sequenced, a comparative analysis of the proteins involved in the formation of the BMP became possible. Sequence homology with proteins belonging to the ubiquitous cation diffusion facilitator (CDF) family and the "Htr-like" serine proteases has been found. While the first group is exclusively dedicated to the transport of heavy metals, the second group consists of heat shock proteins (HSPs) involved in the degradation of badly folded proteins. Other than the serine protease domain, some proteins found in the magnetosomial membrane (MM) also contain PDZ domains, while several other MM proteins contain tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) domains.

The TPR domains are characterized by a folding consisting of two α-helices and include a highly conserved consensus sequence of 8 amino acids (of the 34 possible), which is the most common in nature. Apart from these amino acids, the remainder of the structure is found to be specialised in relation to its functional significance. The more notable compounds that comprise TPR domains include:


Examples of both the TPR-TPR interactions, as well as TPR-nonTPR interactions, have been reported.

The PDZ domains are structures that consist of 6 β-filaments and 2 α-helices that recognise the C-terminal amino acids of proteins in a sequence-specific manner. Usually, the third residue from the C-terminal is phosphorylated, preventing interaction with the PDZ domain. The only conserved residues in these structures are those involved in the recognition of the carboxy terminal. PDZ domains are quite widespread in nature, since they constitute the basic structure upon which multiproteinic complexes are assembled. This is especially true for those associated with membrane proteins, such as the inward rectifier K channels or the β-adrenergic receptors.

The formation of the magnetosome requires at least three steps:

During the first formation of an invagination in the cytoplasmic membrane is triggered by a GTPase. It is supposed this process can take place amongst eukaryotes, as well.

The second step requires the entrance of ferric ions into the newly formed vesicles from the external environment. Even when cultured in a Fe deficient medium, MTB succeed at accumulating high intracellular concentrations of this ion. It has been suggested that they accomplish this by secreting, upon need, a siderophore, a low-molecular-weight ligand displaying an elevated affinity for Fe ions. The "Fe-siderophore" complex is subsequently moved in the cytoplasm, where it is cleaved. The ferric ions must then be converted into the ferrous form (Fe), to be accumulated within the BMP; this is achieved by means of a transmembrane transporter, which exhibits sequence homology with a Na/H antiporter. Furthermore, the complex is a H/Fe antiporter, which transports ions via the proton gradient. These transmembrane transporters are localised both in the cytoplasmic membrane and in the MM, but in an inverted orientation; this configuration allows them to generate an efflux of Fe ions at the cytoplasmic membrane, and an influx of this same ion at the MM. This step is strictly controlled by a cytochrome-dependent redox system, which is not yet fully explained and appears to be species-specific.

During the final stage of the process, the magnetite crystal nucleation is by action of transmembrane proteins with acidic and basic domains. One of these proteins, called Mms6, has also been employed for the artificial synthesis of magnetite, where its presence allows the production of crystals homogeneous in shape and size.

It is likely that many other proteins associated with the MM could be involved in other roles, such as generation of supersaturated concentrations of iron, maintenance of reducing conditions, oxidisation of iron, and partial reduction and dehydration of hydrated iron compounds.

Several clues led to the hypothesis that different genetic sets exist for the biomineralisation of magnetite and greigite. In cultures of "Magnetospirillum magnetotacticum", iron can not be replaced with other transition metals (Ti, Cr, Co, Cu, Ni, Hg, Pb) commonly found in the soil. In a similar manner, oxygen and sulfur are not interchangeable as nonmetallic substances of the magnetosome within the same species.

From a thermodynamic point of view, in the presence of a neutral pH and a low redox potential, the inorganic synthesis of magnetite is favoured when compared to those of other iron oxides. It would thus appear microaerophilic or anaerobic conditions create a suitable potential for the formation of BMPs. Moreover, all iron absorbed by the bacteria is rapidly converted into magnetite, indicating the formation of crystals is not preceded by the accumulation of intermediate iron compounds; this also suggests the structures and the enzymes necessary for biomineralisation are already present within the bacteria. These conclusions are also supported by the fact that MTB cultured in aerobic conditions (and thus nonmagnetic) contain amounts of iron comparable to any other species of bacteria.

In certain types of applications, bacterial magnetite offers several advantages compared to chemically synthesized magnetite. Bacterial magnetosome particles, unlike those produced chemically, have a consistent shape, a narrow size distribution within the single magnetic domain range, and a membrane coating consisting of lipids and proteins. The magnetosome envelope allows for easy couplings of bioactive substances to its surface, a characteristic important for many applications.

Magnetotactic bacterial cells have been used to determine south magnetic poles in meteorites and rocks containing fine-grained magnetic minerals and for the separation of cells after the introduction of magnetotactic bacterial cells into granulocytes and monocytes by phagocytosis. Magnetotactic bacterial magnetite crystals have been used in studies of magnetic domain analysis and in many commercial applications including: the immobilisation of enzymes; the formation of magnetic antibodies, and the quantification of immunoglobulin G; the detection and removal of "Escherichia coli" cells with a fluorescein isothiocyanate conjugated monoclonal antibody, immobilised on magnetotactic bacterial magnetite particles; and the introduction of genes into cells, a technology in which magnetosomes are coated with DNA and "shot" using a particle gun into cells that are difficult to transform using more standard methods.

However, the prerequisite for any large-scale commercial application is mass cultivation of magnetotactic bacteria or the introduction and expression of the genes responsible for magnetosome synthesis into a bacterium, e.g., "E. coli", that can be grown relatively cheaply to extremely large yields. Although some progress has been made, the former has not been achieved with the available pure cultures.



</doc>
<doc id="8868378" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8868378" title="Axenic">
Axenic

In biology, axenic describes the state of a culture in which only a single species, variety, or strain of organism is present and entirely free of all other contaminating organisms. The earliest axenic cultures were of bacteria or unicellular eukaryotes, but axenic cultures of many multicellular organisms are also possible. Axenic culture is an important tool for the study of symbiotic and parasitic organisms in a controlled environment.

Axenic cultures of microorganisms are typically prepared by subculture of an existing mixed culture. This may involve use of a dilution series, in which a culture is successively diluted to the point where subsamples of it contain only a few individual organisms, ideally only a single individual (in the case of an asexual species). These subcultures are allowed to grow until the identity of their constituent organisms can be ascertained. Selection of those cultures consisting solely of the desired organism produces the axenic culture. Subculture selection may also involve manually sampling the target organism from an uncontaminated growth front in an otherwise mixed culture, and using this as an inoculum source for the subculture.

Axenic cultures are usually checked routinely to ensure that they remain axenic. One standard approach with microorganisms is to spread a sample of the culture onto an agar plate, and to incubate this for a fixed period of time. The agar should be an enriched medium that will support the growth of common "contaminating" organisms. Such "contaminating" organisms will grow on the plate during this period, identifying cultures that are no longer axenic.

As axenic cultures are derived from very few organisms, or even a single individual, they are useful because the organisms present within them share a relatively narrow gene pool. In the case of an asexual species derived from a single individual, the resulting culture should consist of identical organisms (though processes such as mutation and horizontal gene transfer may introduce a degree of variability). Consequently, they will generally respond in a more uniform and reproducible fashion, simplifying the interpretation of experiments.

The axenic culture of some pathogens is complicated because they normally thrive within host tissues which exhibit properties that are difficult to replicate "in vitro". This is especially true in the case of intracellular pathogens. However, careful replication of key features of the host environment can resolve these difficulties (e.g. host metabolites, dissolved oxygen), such as with the Q fever pathogen, "Coxiella burnetii".



</doc>
<doc id="5532341" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5532341" title="Flavodoxin">
Flavodoxin

Flavodoxins are electron-transfer proteins. Flavodoxin is a bacterial protein that includes flavin mononucleotide. The structure of flavodoxin is characterized by a five-stranded parallel beta sheet, surrounded by alpha helices at either side of the sheet. They have been isolated from prokaryotes, cyanobacteria, and some eukaryotic algae.



</doc>
<doc id="1103898" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1103898" title="DD-transpeptidase">
DD-transpeptidase

DD-transpeptidase (, "DD-peptidase", "DD-transpeptidase", "DD-carboxypeptidase", "D-alanyl-D-alanine carboxypeptidase", "D-alanyl-D-alanine-cleaving-peptidase", "D-alanine carboxypeptidase", "D-alanyl carboxypeptidase", and "serine-type D-Ala-D-Ala carboxypeptidase".) is a bacterial enzyme that catalyzes the transfer of the R-L-aca-D-alanyl moiety of R-L-aca-D-alanyl-D-alanine carbonyl donors to the γ-OH of their active-site serine and from this to a final acceptor. It is involved in bacterial cell wall biosynthesis, namely, the transpeptidation that crosslinks the peptide side chains of peptidoglycan strands.

The antibiotic penicillin irreversibly binds to and inhibits the activity of the transpeptidase enzyme by forming a highly stable penicilloyl-enzyme intermediate. Because of the interaction between penicillin and transpeptidase, this enzyme is also known as penicillin-binding protein (PBP).

DD-transpeptidase is mechanistically similar to the proteolytic reactions of the trypsin protein family.

Crosslinking of peptidyl moieties of adjacent glycan strands is a two-step reaction. The first step involves the cleavage of the D-alanyl-D-alanine bond of a peptide unit precursor acting as carbonyl donor, the release of the carboxyl-terminal D-alanine, and the formation of the acyl-enzyme. The second step involves the breakdown of the acyl-enzyme intermediate and the formation of a new peptide bond between the carbonyl of the D-alanyl moiety and theamino group of another peptide unit.

Most discussion of DD-peptidase mechanisms revolves around the catalysts of proton transfer. During formation of the acyl-enzyme intermediate, a proton must be removed from the active site serine hydroxyl group and one must be added to the amine leaving group. A similar proton movement must be facilitated in deacylation. The identity of the general acid and base catalysts involved in these proton transfers has not yet been elucidated. However, the catalytic triad tyrosine, lysine, and serine, as well as serine, lysine, serine have been proposed.

Transpeptidases are members of the penicilloyl-serine transferase superfamily, which has a signature SxxK conserved motif. With "x" denoting a variable amino acid residue, the transpeptidases of this superfamily show a trend in the form of three motifs: SxxK, SxN (or analogue), and KTG (or analogue). These motifs occur at equivalent places, and are roughly equally spaced, along the polypeptide chain. The folded protein brings these motifs close to each other at the catalytic center between an all-α domain and an α/β domain. With "x" denoting a variable amino acid residue, the transpeptidases of this superfamily show a trend in the form of three motifs: SxxK, SxN (or analogue), and KTG (or analogue). These motifs occur at equivalent places, and are roughly equally spaced, along the polypeptide chain. The folded protein brings these motifs close to each other at the catalytic center between an all-α domain and an α/β domain.

The structure of the streptomyces K15 DD-transpeptidase has been studied, and consists of a single polypeptide chain organized into two domains. One domain contains mainly α-helices, and the second one is of α/β-type. The center of the catalytic cleft is occupied by the Ser35-Thr36-Thr37-Lys38 tetrad, which includes the nucleophilic Ser35 residue at the amino-terminal end of helix α2. One side of the cavity is defined by the Ser96-Gly97-Cys98 loop connecting helices α4 and α5. The Lys213-Thr214-Gly215 triad lies on strand β3 on the opposite side of the cavity. The backbone NH group of the essential Ser35 residue and that of Ser216 downstream from the motif Lys213-Thr214-Gly215 occupy positions that are compatible with the oxyanion hole function required for catalysis.

The enzyme is classified as a DD-transpeptidase because the susceptible peptide bond of the carbonyl donor extends between two carbon atoms with the D-configuration.

All bacteria possess at least one, most often several, monofunctional serine DD-peptidases.

This enzyme is an excellent drug target because it is essential, is accessible from the periplasm, and has no equivalent in mammalian cells. DD-transpeptidase is the target protein of β-lactam antibiotics (e.g. penicillin) This is because the structure of the β-lactam closely resembles the D-ala-D-ala residue.

β-lactams exert their effect by competitively inactivating the serine DD-transpeptidase catalytic site. Penicillin is a cyclic analogue of the D-Ala-D-Ala terminated carbonyl donors, therefore in the presence of this antibiotic, the reaction stops at the level of the serine ester-linked penicilloyl enzyme. Thus β-lactam antibiotics force these enzymes to behave like penicillin binding proteins.

Kinetically, the interaction between the DD-peptidase and beta-lactams is a three-step reaction:

formula_1

Beta-Iactams may form an adduct E-I* of high stability with DD-transpeptidase. The half life of this adduct is around hours, whereas the half-life of the normal reaction is in the order of milliseconds.

The interference with the enzyme processes responsible for cell wall formation results in cellular lysis and death due to the triggering of the autolytic system in the bacteria.




</doc>
<doc id="9939778" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9939778" title="Gracilicutes">
Gracilicutes

Gracilicutes (Latin: "gracilis", slender, and "cutis", skin, referring to the cell wall) is a clade in bacterial phylogeny.

Traditionally gram staining results were most commonly used as a classification tool, consequently until the advent of molecular phylogeny, the Kingdom Monera (as the domains Bacteria and Archaea were known then) was divided into four phyla,

This classification system was abandoned in favour of the three-domain system based on molecular phylogeny started by C. Woese.

This taxon was revived in 2006 by Cavalier-Smith as an infrakindgom containing the phyla Spirochaetae, Sphingobacteria (FCB), Planctobacteria (PVC), and Proteobacteria. It is a gram-negative clade that branched off from other bacteria just before the evolutionary loss of the outer membrane or capsule, and just after the evolution of flagella. This taxon is not generally accepted and the three-domain system is followed.

An almost identical taxon called Hydrobacteria was defined in 2009 using bioinfomatic methods. It is in contrast to the other major group of eubacteria called Terrabacteria. The analysis also altered the internal phylogeny of this group, with PVC-FCB-Spirochaetae placed forming a clade next to Proteobacteria. What was PVC is described as polyphyletic.

The following graph shows Cavalier-Smith's version of the tree of life, indicating the status of Gracilicutes.


</doc>
<doc id="13144376" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13144376" title="Rhizobacteria">
Rhizobacteria

Rhizobacteria are root-associated bacteria that form symbiotic relationships with many plants. The name comes from the Greek "rhiza", meaning root. Though parasitic varieties of rhizobacteria exist, the term usually refers to bacteria that form a relationship beneficial for both parties (mutualism). They are an important group of microorganisms used in biofertilizer. Biofertilization accounts for about 65% of the nitrogen supply to crops worldwide. Rhizobacteria are often referred to as plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria, or PGPRs. The term PGPRs was first used by Joseph W. Kloepper in the late 1970s and has become commonly used in scientific literature. PGPRs have different relationships with different species of host plants. The two major classes of relationships are rhizospheric and endophytic. Rhizospheric relationships consist of the PGPRs that colonize the surface of the root, or superficial intercellular spaces of the host plant, often forming root nodules. The dominant species found in the rhizosphere is a microbe from the genus "Azospirillum". Endophytic relationships involve the PGPRs residing and growing within the host plant in the apoplastic space.

Nitrogen fixation is one of the most beneficial processes performed by rhizobacteria. Nitrogen is a vital nutrient to plants and gaseous nitrogen (N) is not available to them due to the high energy required to break the triple bonds between the two atoms. Rhizobacteria, through nitrogen fixation, are able to convert gaseous nitrogen (N) to ammonia (NH) making it an available nutrient to the host plant which can support and enhance plant growth. The host plant provides the bacteria with amino acids so they do not need to assimilate ammonia. The amino acids are then shuttled back to the plant with newly fixed nitrogen. Nitrogenase is an enzyme involved in nitrogen fixation and requires anaerobic conditions. Membranes within root nodules are able to provide these conditions. The rhizobacteria require oxygen to metabolize, so oxygen is provided by a hemoglobin protein called leghemoglobin which is produced within the nodules. Legumes are well-known nitrogen-fixing crops and have been used for centuries in crop rotation to maintain the health of the soil. 

The symbiotic relationship between rhizobacteria and their host plants is not without costs. For the plant to be able to benefit from the added available nutrients provided by the rhizobacteria, it needs to provide a place and the proper conditions for the rhizobacteria to live. Creating and maintaining root nodules for rhizobacteria can cost between 12–25% of the plant's total photosynthetic output. Legumes are often able to colonize early successional environments due to the unavailability of nutrients. Once colonized, though, the rhizobacteria make the soil surrounding the plant more nutrient rich, which in turn can lead to competition with other plants. The symbiotic relationship, in short, can lead to increased competition.

PGPRs increase the availability of nutrients through the solubilization of unavailable forms of nutrients and by the production of siderophores which aids in the facilitating of nutrient transport. Phosphorus, a limiting nutrient for plant growth, can be plentiful in soil, but is most commonly found in insoluble forms. Organic acids and phosphotases released by rhizobacteria found in plant rhizospheres facilitate the conversion of insoluble forms of phosphorus to plant-available forms such as HPO. PGPR bacteria include "Pseudomonas putida", "Azospirillum fluorescens", and "Azospirillum lipoferum" and notable nitrogen-fixing bacteria associated with legumes includes "Allorhizobium", "Azorhizobium", "Bradyrhizobium", and "Rhizobium".

Though microbial inoculants can be beneficial for crops, they are not widely used in industrial agriculture, as large-scale application techniques have yet to become economically viable. A notable exception is the use of rhizobial inoculants for legumes such as peas. Inoculation with PGPRs ensures efficient nitrogen fixation, and they have been employed in North American agriculture for over 100 years.

Plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR) were first defined by Kloepper and Schroth to describe soil bacteria that colonize the roots of plants following inoculation onto seed and that enhance plant growth. The following are implicit in the colonization process: ability to survive inoculation onto seed, to multiply in the spermosphere (region surrounding the seed) in response to seed exudates, to attach to the root surface, and to colonize the developing root system. The ineffectiveness of PGPR in the field has often been attributed to their inability to colonize plant roots. A variety of bacterial traits and specific genes contribute to this process, but only a few have been identified. These include motility, chemotaxis to seed and root exudates, production of pili or fimbriae, production of specific cell surface components, ability to use specific components of root exudates, protein secretion, and quorum sensing. The generation of mutants altered in expression of these traits is aiding our understanding of the precise role each one plays in the colonization process.

Progress in the identification of new, previously uncharacterized genes is being made using nonbiased screening strategies that rely on gene fusion technologies. These strategies employ reporter transposons and in vitro expression technology (IVET) to detect genes expressed during colonization.

Using molecular markers such as green fluorescent protein or fluorescent antibodies, it is possible to monitor the location of individual rhizobacteria on the root using confocal laser scanning microscopy. This approach has also been combined with an rRNA-targeting probe to monitor the metabolic activity of a rhizobacterial strain in the rhizosphere and showed that bacteria located at the root tip were most active.

PGPRs enhance plant growth by direct and indirect means, but the specific mechanisms involved have not all been well characterized. Direct mechanisms of plant growth promotion by PGPRs can be demonstrated in the absence of plant pathogens or other rhizosphere microorganisms, while indirect mechanisms involve the ability of PGPRs to reduce the harmful effects of plant pathogens on crop yield. PGPRs have been reported to directly enhance plant growth by a variety of mechanisms: fixation of atmospheric nitrogen transferred to the plant, production of siderophores that chelate iron and make it available to the plant root, solubilization of minerals such as phosphorus, and synthesis of phytohormones. Direct enhancement of mineral uptake due to increases in specific ion fluxes at the root surface in the presence of PGPRs has also been reported. PGPR strains may use one or more of these mechanisms in the rhizosphere. Molecular approaches using microbial and plant mutants altered in their ability to synthesize or respond to specific phytohormones have increased understanding of the role of phytohormone synthesis as a direct mechanism of plant growth enhancement by PGPRs. PGPR that synthesize auxins and cytokinins or that interfere with plant ethylene synthesis have been identified.

Studies conducted on sugar beet crops found that some root-colonizing bacteria were deleterious rhizobacteria (DRB). Sugar beet seeds inoculated with DRB had reduced germination rates, root lesions, reduced root elongation, root distortions, increased fungi infection, and decreased plant growth. In one trial the sugar beet yield was reduced by 48%.

Six strains of rhizobacteria have been identified as being DRB. The strains are in the genera "Enterobacter", "Klebsiella", "Citrobacter", "Flavobacterium", "Achromobacter", and "Arthrobacter". Due to a large number of taxonomic species yet to be described, complete characterization has not been possible as DRB are highly variable.

The presence of PGPRs has proven to reduce and inhibit the colonization of DRB on sugar beet roots. Plots inoculated with PGPRs and DRBs had an increase in production of 39% while plots only treated with DRBs had a reduction in production of 30%.

Rhizobacteria are also able to control plant diseases that are caused by other bacteria and fungi. Disease is suppressed through induced systematic resistance and through the production of antifungal metabolites. "Pseudomonas" biocontrol strains have been genetically modified to improve plant growth and improve the disease resistance of agricultural crops. In agriculture, inoculant bacteria are often applied to the seed coat of seeds prior to being sown. Inoculated seeds are more likely to establish large enough rhizobacterial populations within the rhizosphere to produce notable beneficial effects on the crop.


</doc>
<doc id="13575891" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13575891" title="Extracellular polymeric substance">
Extracellular polymeric substance

Extracellular polymeric substances (EPSs) are natural polymers of high molecular weight secreted by microorganisms into their environment. EPSs establish the functional and structural integrity of biofilms, and are considered the fundamental component that determines the physiochemical properties of a biofilm.

EPSs are mostly composed of polysaccharides (exopolysaccharides) and proteins, but include other macro-molecules such as DNA, lipids and humic substances. EPSs are the construction material of bacterial settlements and either remain attached to the cell's outer surface, or are secreted into its growth medium. These compounds are important in biofilm formation and cells attachment to surfaces. EPSs constitute 50% to 90% of a biofilm's total organic matter.

Exopolysaccharides (also sometimes abbreviated EPSs) are high-molecular-weight polymers that are composed of sugar residues and are secreted by a microorganism into the surrounding environment. Microorganisms synthesize a wide spectrum of multifunctional polysaccharides including intracellular polysaccharides, structural polysaccharides and extracellular polysaccharides or exopolysaccharides. Exopolysaccharides generally consist of monosaccharides and some non-carbohydrate substituents (such as acetate, pyruvate, succinate, and phosphate). Owing to the wide diversity in composition, exopolysaccharides have found multifarious applications in various food and pharmaceutical industries. Many microbial EPSs provide properties that are almost identical to the gums currently in use. With innovative approaches, efforts are underway to supersede the traditionally used plant and algal gums by their microbial counterparts. Moreover, considerable progress has been made in discovering and developing new microbial EPSs that possess novel industrial significance.

Capsular exopolysaccharides can protect pathogenic bacteria against desiccation and predation, and contribute to their pathogenicity. Bacteria existing in biofilms are less vulnerable compared to planktonic bacteria, as the EPS matrix is able to act as a protective diffusion barrier. The physical and chemical characteristics of bacterial cells can be affected by EPS composition, influencing factors such as cellular recognition, aggregation, and adhesion in their natural environments. Furthermore, the EPS layer acts as a nutrient trap, facilitating bacterial growth.

The exopolysaccharides of some strains of lactic acid bacteria, e.g., Lactococcus lactis subsp. cremoris, contribute a gelatinous texture to fermented milk products (e.g., Viili), and these polysaccharides are also digestible. An example of the industrial use of exopolysaccharides is the application of dextran in panettone and other breads in the bakery industry.

Exopolysaccharides can facilitate the attachment of nitrogen-fixing bacteria to plant roots and soil particles, which mediates a symbiotic relationship. This is important for colonization of roots and the rhizosphere, which is a key component of soil food webs and nutrient cycling in ecosystems. It also allows for successful invasion and infection of the host plant.

Bacterial extracellular polymeric substances can aid in bioremediation of heavy metals as they have the capacity to adsorb metal cations, among other dissolved substances. This can be useful in the treatment of wastewater systems, as biofilms are able to bind to and remove metals such as copper, lead, nickel, and cadmium. The binding affinity and metal specificity of EPS varies depending on polymer composition, as well as environmental factors such as concentration and pH.

In a geomicrobiological context, EPS has been observed to affect precipitation of minerals, particularly carbonates. EPS may also bind to and trap particles in biofilm suspensions, which can restrict dispersion and element cycling. Sediment stability can be increased by EPS, as it influences cohesion, permeability, and erosion of the sediment. There is evidence that the adhesion and metal-binding ability of EPS affects mineral leaching rates in both environmental and industrial contexts. These interactions between EPS and the abiotic environment allow for EPS to have a large impact on biogeochemical cycling.

Due to the growing need to find a more efficient and environmentally friendly alternative to conventional waste removal methods, industries are paying more attention to the function of bacteria and their EPSs in bioremediation.

Researchers found that adding EPSs from cyanobacteria to wastewaters removes heavy metals such as copper, cadmium and lead.  EPSs alone can physically interact with these heavy metals and take them in through biosorption. The efficiency of removal can be optimized by treating the EPSs with different acids or bases first before adding them to the wastewaters. 

Contaminated soils contain high levels of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs); EPSs from the bacterium "Zoogloea" sp. and the fungus  "Aspergillus niger", are efficient at removing these toxic compounds. EPSs contain enzymes such as oxidoreductase and hydrolase, which are capable of  degrading PAHs. The amount of PAHs degradation depends on the concentration of EPSs added to the soil. This method proves to be low cost and highly efficient. 

In recent years, EPSs from marine bacteria have been found to speed up the cleanup of oil spills. During the Deepwater Horizon oil spill in 2010, these EPS-producing bacteria were able to grow and multiply rapidly.  It was later found that their EPSs dissolved the oil and formed oil aggregates on the ocean surface, which sped up the cleaning process. These oil aggregates also  provided a valuable source of nutrients for other marine microbial communities. This let scientists modify and optimize the use of EPSs to clean up oil spills.





</doc>
<doc id="23971" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23971" title="Pilus">
Pilus

A pilus (Latin for 'hair'; plural: "pili") is a hair-like appendage found on the surface of many bacteria and archaea. The terms "pilus" and "fimbria" (Latin for 'fringe'; plural: "fimbriae") can be used interchangeably, although some researchers reserve the term "pilus" for the appendage required for bacterial conjugation. All pili in the latter sense are primarily composed of pilin proteins, which are oligomeric.

Dozens of these structures can exist on the bacterial and archaeal surface. Some bacteria, viruses or bacteriophages attach to receptors on pili at the start of their reproductive cycle.

Pili are antigenic. They are also fragile and constantly replaced, sometimes with pili of different composition, resulting in altered antigenicity. Specific host responses to old pili structure are not effective on the new structure. Recombination genes of pili code for variable (V) and constant (C) regions of the pili (similar to immunoglobulin diversity).

Conjugative pili allow for the transfer of DNA between bacteria, in the process of bacterial conjugation. They are sometimes called "sex pili", in analogy to sexual reproduction, because they allow for the exchange of genes via the formation of "mating pairs". Perhaps the most well-studied is the pilus of "Escherichia coli", encoded by the fertility F sex factor.

A pili is typically 6 to 7 nm in diameter. During conjugation, a pilus emerging from the donor bacterium ensnares the recipient bacterium, draws it in close, and eventually triggers the formation of a mating bridge, which establishes direct contact and the formation of a controlled pore that allows transfer of DNA from the donor to the recipient. Typically, the DNA transferred consists of the genes required to make and transfer pili (often encoded on a plasmid), and so is a kind of selfish DNA; however, other pieces of DNA are often co-transferred and this can result in dissemination of genetic traits throughout a bacterial population, such as antibiotic resistance. Not all bacteria can make conjugative pili, but conjugation can occur between bacteria of different species.

Some pili, called type IV pili (T4P), generate motile forces. The external ends of the pili adhere to a solid substrate, either the surface to which the bacterium is attached or to other bacteria. Then, when the pili contract, they pull the bacterium forward like a grappling hook. Movement produced by type IV pili is typically jerky, so it is called twitching motility, as opposed to other forms of bacterial motility such as that produced by flagella. However, some bacteria, for example "Myxococcus xanthus", exhibit gliding motility. Bacterial type IV pili are similar in structure to the component flagellins of archaella (archaeal flagella). Besides archaella, many archaea produce adhesive type 4 pili, which enable archaeal cells to adhere to different substrates. The N-terminal alpha-helical portions of the archaeal type 4 pilins and archaellins are homologous to the corresponding regions of bacterial T4P; however, the C-terminal beta-strand-rich domains appear to be unrelated in bacterial and archaeal pilins.

Genetic transformation is the process by which a recipient bacterial cell takes up DNA from a neighboring cell and integrates this DNA into its genome by homologous recombination. In "Neisseria meningitidis" (also called meningococcus), DNA transformation requires the presence of short DNA uptake sequences (DUSs) which are 9-10 monomers residing in coding regions of the donor DNA. Specific recognition of DUSs is mediated by a type IV pilin. Menningococcal type IV pili bind DNA through the minor pilin ComP via an electropositive stripe that is predicted to be exposed on the filament's surface. ComP displays an exquisite binding preference for selective DUSs. The distribution of DUSs within the "N. meningitides" genome favors certain genes, suggesting that there is a bias for genes involved in genomic maintenance and repair.

To initiate formation of a biofilm, fimbriae must attach bacteria to host surfaces for colonization during infection. A fimbria is a short pilus that is used to attach the bacterium to a surface. They are sometimes called "attachment pili". Fimbriae are either located at the poles of a cell or are evenly spread over its entire surface. Mutant bacteria that lack fimbriae cannot adhere to their usual target surfaces, and thus cannot cause diseases.

Some fimbriae can contain lectins. The lectins are necessary to adhere to target cells because they can recognize oligosaccharide units on the surface of these target cells. Other fimbriae bind to components of the extracellular matrix. Fimbriae found in Gram-negative have the pilin subunits covalently linked.

Some aerobic bacteria form a thin layer at the surface of a broth culture. This layer, called a pellicle, consists of many aerobic bacteria that adhere to the surface by their fimbriae or "attachment pili". Thus, fimbriae allow the aerobic bacteria to remain on the broth, from which they take nutrients, while they congregate near the air.

Pili are responsible for virulence in the pathogenic strains of many bacteria, including "E. coli", "Vibrio cholerae", and many strains of "Streptococcus". This is because the presence of pili greatly enhances bacteria's ability to bind to body tissues, which then increases replication rates and ability to interact with the host organism. If a species of bacteria has multiple strains but only some are pathogenic, it is likely that the pathogenic strains will have pili while the nonpathogenic strains won't.

The development of attachment pili may then result in the development of further virulence traits. Nonpathogenic strains of "V. cholerae" first evolved pili, allowing them to bind to human tissues and form microcolonies. These pili then served as binding sites for the lysogenic bacteriophage that carries the disease-causing toxin. The gene for this toxin, once incorporated into the bacterium's genome, is expressed when the gene coding for the pilus is expressed (hence the name "toxin mediated pilus").




</doc>
<doc id="15191732" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15191732" title="Lipophilic bacteria">
Lipophilic bacteria

Lipophilic bacteria ("fat-loving bacteria") are bacteria that may proliferate in lipids.

They include lipophilic corynebacteria.

"Cutibacterium acnes" is a type of lipophilic bacteria, releasing fatty acids and worsening comedones in acne.

However, the group of lipophilic bacteria are not pathogenic, i.e. they don't cause food poisoning or food infection 

In terms of evolution, lipophilism can be regarded as fine-tuning the metabolism to lipophilic habitats. Some bacteria do not only accelerate their metabolism using lipids prevailing in their environment, some of them cannot proliferate without external lipid supply. For example, some Corynebacteria, such as "Corynebacterium uropygiale", lost their ability to produce certain fatty acids by themselves. On the one hand, this renders the bacteria vulnerable to environmental changes. On the other hand, energy can be saved as there is no need to put effort into lipid synthesis.

Most materials in laboratories and health-care centers have small amounts of lipids on their surface, and thus may support the proliferation of lipophilic bacteria. However, since they are not pathogenic, this is not a serious threat.

Lipophilic bacteria may also proliferate in diet fat. However, in modern food industry this is very rare and at worst causes a discoloration of the fat

Many lipophilic bacteria are a good source of biosurfactants, hence are used commercially, e.g. "Bacillus licheniformis". These kinds of bacteria produce biosurfactants which replace chemically produced surfactants. Biosurfactans are degradable unlike the chemical ones.


</doc>
<doc id="16818139" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16818139" title="Microbial inoculant">
Microbial inoculant

Microbial inoculants also known as soil inoculants or bioinoculants are agricultural amendments that use beneficial rhizospheric or endophytic microbes to promote plant health. Many of the microbes involved form symbiotic relationships with the target crops where both parties benefit (mutualism). While microbial inoculants are applied to improve plant nutrition, they can also be used to promote plant growth by stimulating plant hormone production.

Research into the benefits of inoculants in agriculture extends beyond their capacity as biofertilizers. Microbial inoculants can induce systemic acquired resistance (SAR) of crop species to several common crop diseases (provides resistance against pathogens). So far SAR has been demonstrated for powdery mildew ("Blumeria graminis" f. sp. "hordei", Heitefuss, 2001), take-all ("Gaeumannomyces graminis" var. "tritici", Khaosaad "et al.", 2007), leaf spot ("Pseudomonas syringae", Ramos Solano "et al.", 2008) and root rot ("Fusarium culmorum", Waller "et al." 2005).

The rhizobacteria commonly applied as inoculants include nitrogen-fixers, phosphate-solubilisers and other root-associated beneficial bacteria which enhance the availability of the macronutrients nitrogen and phosphorus to the host plant. Such bacteria are commonly referred to as plant growth promoting rhizobacteria (PGPR).

The most commonly applied rhizobacteria are "Rhizobium" and closely related genera. "Rhizobium" are nitrogen-fixing bacteria that form symbiotic associations within nodules on the roots of legumes. This increases host nitrogen nutrition and is important to the cultivation of soybeans, chickpeas and many other leguminous crops. For non-leguminous crops, "Azospirillum" has been demonstrated to be beneficial in some cases for nitrogen fixation and plant nutrition.

For cereal crops, diazotrophic rhizobacteria have increased plant growth, grain yield (Caballero-Mellado "et al.", 1992), nitrogen and phosphorus uptake, and nitrogen (Caballero-Mellado "et al.", 1992), phosphorus (Caballero-Mellado "et al.", 1992; Belimov "et al.", 1995) and potassium content (Caballero-Mellado "et al.", 1992). Rhizobacteria live in root nodes, and are associated with legumes.

To improve phosphorus nutrition, the use of phosphate-solubilising bacteria (PSB) such as "Agrobacterium radiobacter" has also received attention (Belimov "et al.", 1995a; 1995b; Singh & Kapoor, 1999). As the name suggests, PSB are free-living bacteria that break down inorganic soil phosphates to simpler forms that enable uptake by plants.

Symbiotic relationships between fungi and plant roots is referred to as a Mycorrhiza association. This symbiotic relationships is present in nearly all land plants and give both the plant and fungi advantages to survival. The plant can give upwards of 5-30% of its energy production to the fungi in exchange for increasing the root absorptive area with hyphae which gives the plant access to nutrients it would otherwise not be able to attain. The two most common mycorrhizae are arbuscular mycorrhizae and ectomycorrhizae. Ectomycorrhizae associations are most commonly found in woody-species, and have less implications for agricultural systems.  

Arbuscular mycorrhiza (AM) has received attention as a potential agriculture amendment for its ability to access and provide the host plant phosphorus. Under a reduced fertilization greenhouse system that was inoculated with a mixture of AM fungi and rhizobacteria, tomato yields that were given from 100% fertility were attained at 70% fertility. This 30% reduction in fertilizer application can aid in the reduction of nutrient pollution, and help prolong finite mineral resources such as phosphorus (Peak phosphorus). Other effects include increases in salinity tolerance, drought tolerance, and resistance to trace metal toxicity.

Fungal inoculation alone can benefit host
plants. Inoculation paired with other amendments can further improve
conditions. Arbuscular mycorrhizal inoculation combined with compost is a
common household amendment for personal gardens, agriculture, and nurseries. It
has been observed that this pairing can also promote microbial functions in
soils that have been affected by mining.

Certain fungal partners do best in specific
ecotones or with certain crops. Arbuscular mycorrhizal inoculation paired with plant
growth promoting bacteria resulted in a higher yield and quicker maturation in
upland rice paddys.

Maize growth improved after an amendment of
arbuscular mycorrhizae and biochar. This amendment can also decrease
cadmium uptake by crops.

Fungal inoculants can be used with or without additional amendments in private gardens, homesteads, agricultural production, native nurseries, and land restoration projects.

The combination of strains of Plant Growth Promoting Rhizobacteria (PGPR) has been shown to benefit rice and barley. The main benefit from dual inoculation is increased plant nutrient uptake from both soil and fertilizer. Multiple strains of inoculant have also been demonstrated to increase total nitrogenase activity compared to single strains of inoculants, even when only one strain is diazotrophic.

PGPR and arbuscular mycorrhizae in combination can be useful in increasing wheat growth in nutrient poor soil and improving nitrogen-extraction from fertilised soils.




</doc>
<doc id="8778829" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8778829" title="Biogenic sulfide corrosion">
Biogenic sulfide corrosion

Biogenic sulfide corrosion is a bacterially mediated process of forming hydrogen sulfide gas and the subsequent conversion to sulfuric acid that attacks concrete and steel within wastewater environments. The hydrogen sulfide gas is biochemically oxidized in the presence of moisture to form sulfuric acid. The effect of sulfuric acid on concrete and steel surfaces exposed to severe wastewater environments can be devastating. In the USA alone, corrosion is causing sewer asset losses estimated at
around $14 billion per year. This cost is expected to increase as the aging infrastructure continues to fail.

Corrosion may occur where stale sewage generates hydrogen sulfide gas into an atmosphere containing oxygen gas and high relative humidity. There must be an underlying anaerobic aquatic habitat containing sulfates and an overlying aerobic aquatic habitat separated by a gas phase containing both oxygen and hydrogen sulfide at concentrations in excess of 2 ppm.

Fresh domestic sewage entering a wastewater collection system contains proteins including organic sulfur compounds oxidizable to sulfates and may contain inorganic sulfates. Dissolved oxygen is depleted as bacteria begin to catabolize organic material in sewage. In the absence of dissolved oxygen and nitrates, sulfates are reduced to hydrogen sulfide as an alternative source of oxygen for catabolizing organic waste by sulfate reducing bacteria (SRB), identified primarily from the obligate anaerobic species "Desulfovibrio".

Hydrogen sulfide production depends on various physicochemical, topographic and hydraulic parameters such as:

Some hydrogen sulfide gas diffuses into the headspace environment above the wastewater. Moisture evaporated from warm sewage may condense on unsubmerged walls of sewers, and is likely to hang in partially formed droplets from the horizontal crown of the sewer. As a portion of the hydrogen sulfide gas and oxygen gas from the air above the sewage dissolves into these stationary droplets, they become a habitat for sulfur oxidizing bacteria (SOB), of the genus "Acidithiobacillus". Colonies of these aerobic bacteria metabolize the hydrogen sulfide gas to sulfuric acid.

Sulfuric acid produced by microorganisms will interact with the surface of the structure material. For ordinary Portland cement, it reacts with the calcium hydroxide in concrete to form calcium sulfate. This change simultaneously destroys the polymeric nature of calcium hydroxide and substitutes a larger molecule into the matrix causing pressure and spalling of the adjacent concrete and aggregate particles. The weakened crown may then collapse under heavy overburden loads. Even within a well-designed sewer network, a rule of thumb in the industry suggests that 5% of the total length may/will suffer from biogenic corrosion. In these specific areas, biogenic sulfide corrosion can deteriorate metal or several millimeters per year of concrete (see Table).

For calcium aluminate cements, processes are completely different because they are based on another chemical composition. At least three different mechanisms contribute to the better resistance to biogenic corrosion:
A mortar made of calcium aluminate cement combined with
calcium aluminate aggregates, i.e. a 100% calcium aluminate material, will last much longer as aggregates can also limit microorganisms’ growth and inhibits the acid generation at the source itself.

There are several options to address biogenic sulfide corrosion problems: impairing HS formation, venting out the HS or using materials resistant to biogenic corrosion. For example, sewage flows more rapidly through steeper gradient sewers reducing time available for hydrogen sulfide generation. Likewise, removing sludge and sediments from the bottom of the pipes reduces the amount of anoxic areas responsible for sulfate reducing bacteria growth. Providing good ventilation of sewers can reduce atmospheric concentrations of hydrogen sulfide gas and may dry exposed sewer crowns, but this may create odor issues with neighbors around the venting shafts. Three other efficient methods can be used involving continuous operation of mechanical equipment: chemical reactant like calcium nitrate can be continuously added in the sewerage water to impair the HS formation, an active ventilation through odor treatment units to remove HS, or an injection of compressed air in pressurized mains to avoid the anaerobic condition to develop. In sewerage areas where biogenic sulfide corrosion is expected, acid resistant materials like calcium aluminate cements, PVC or vitrified clay pipe may be substituted to ordinary concrete or steel sewers. 
Existing structures that have extensive exposure to biogenic corrosion such as sewer manholes and pump station wet wells can be rehabilitated. Rehabilitation can be done with materials such as a structural epoxy coating, this epoxy is designed to be both acid resistant and strengthen the compromised concrete structure.



Pomeroy's report contains errors in the equation: the pipeline slope (S, p. 8) is quoted as m/100m, but should be m/m. This introduces a factor of 10 underestimate in the calculation of the 'Z factor', used to indicate if there is a risk of sulphide-induced corrosion, if the published units are used. The web link is to the revised 1992 edition, which contains the units error - the 1976 edition has the correct units.


</doc>
<doc id="8231013" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8231013" title="Reports of Streptococcus mitis on the Moon">
Reports of Streptococcus mitis on the Moon

As part of the Apollo 12 mission, the camera from the Surveyor 3 probe was brought back from the Moon to Earth. On analyzing the camera it was found that the common bacterium "Streptococcus mitis" was alive on the camera. This was attributed by NASA to the camera not being sterilized on Earth prior to its launch two and a half years previously.. However, later study showed that the scientists analysing the camera on return to Earth used procedures that were inadequate to prevent recontamination after return to Earth, for instance with their arms exposed, not covering their entire bodies as modern scientists would do. There may also have been possibilities for contamination during the return mission as the camera was returned in a porous bag rather than the airtight containers used for lunar sample return. As a result, the result remains controversial.

Since the Apollo Program, there has been at least one independent investigation into the validity of the NASA claim. Leonard D. Jaffe, a Surveyor program scientist and custodian of the Surveyor 3 parts brought back from the Moon, stated in a letter to the Planetary Society that a member of his staff reported that a "breach of sterile procedure" took place at just the right time to produce a false positive result. One of the implements being used to scrape samples off the Surveyor parts was laid down on a non-sterile laboratory bench, and then was used to collect surface samples for culturing. Jaffe wrote, "It is, therefore, quite possible that the microorganisms were transferred to the camera after its return to Earth, and that they had never been to the Moon." In 2007, NASA funded an archival study that sought the film of the camera-body microbial sampling, to confirm the report of a breach in sterile technique.

The bacterial test is now non-repeatable because the parts were subsequently taken out of quarantine and fully re-exposed to terrestrial conditions (the Surveyor 3 camera is now on display in the Smithsonian Air and Space Museum in Washington, D.C.).

The Surveyor 3 camera was returned from the Moon in a nylon duffel bag, and was not in the type of sealed airtight metal container used to return lunar samples in the early Apollo missions. It is therefore possible that it was contaminated by the astronauts and the environment in the Apollo 12 capsule itself. 

In March 2011, three researchers co-authored a paper, entitled "A Microbe on the Moon? Surveyor III and Lessons Learned for Future Sample Return Missions" that assessed the validity of claims that the "S. mitis" samples found on the camera had indeed survived for nearly three years on the Moon. The paper concluded that the presence of microbes could more likely be attributed to poor clean room conditions rather than the survival of bacteria for three years in the harsh moon environment. The paper also discussed the implication this incident would have for contamination control in future space missions.

Countervailing evidence against the secondary contamination hypothesis is the fact that, according to Lieutenant Colonel Fred Mitchell, lead author of the original 1971 paper there was a significant delay before the sampled culture began growing: this is consistent with the sampled bacteria consisting of dormant cells, but not if the sampled culture was the result of fresh contamination. In addition, according to Mitchell, the microbes clung exclusively to the foam during culturing, which would not have happened had there been contamination. Furthermore, if fresh contamination had occurred, millions of individual bacteria and "a representation of the entire microbial population would be expected"; instead, only a few individual bacteria were sampled, and only from a single species.

This subject was covered in the 2008 Discovery Channel documentary series, "When We Left Earth" and on episode of the Science Channel series "Nasa's Unexplained Files" entitled "Return of the Moon Bugs".



</doc>
<doc id="1505927" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1505927" title="Coliform bacteria">
Coliform bacteria

Coliform bacteria are defined as Rod shaped Gram-negative non-spore forming and motile or non-motile bacteria which can ferment lactose with the production of acid and gas when incubated at 35–37°C. Due to the limited ability of certain coliform bacteria to ferment lactose, the definition has changed to bacteria containing the enzyme β-galactosidase. They are a commonly used indicator of sanitary quality of foods and water. Coliforms can be found in the aquatic environment, in soil and on vegetation; they are universally present in large numbers in the feces of warm-blooded animals. While coliforms themselves are not normally causes of serious illness, they are easy to culture, and their presence is used to indicate that other pathogenic organisms of fecal origin may be present. Such pathogens include disease-causing bacteria, viruses, or protozoa and many multicellular parasites. Coliform procedures are performed in aerobic or anaerobic conditions.

Typical genera include:

"Escherichia coli" ("E. coli") can be distinguished from most other coliforms by its ability to ferment lactose at 44°C in the fecal coliform test, and by its growth and color reaction on certain types of culture media. When cultured on an eosin methylene blue (EMB) plate, a positive result for "E. coli" is metallic green colonies on a dark purple medium. Also can be cultured on Tryptone Bile X-Glucuronide (TBX) to appear as blue or green colonies after incubation period of 24 hours. Escherichia coli have an incubation period of 12–72 hours with the optimal growth temperature being 37°C. Unlike the general coliform group, "E. coli" are almost exclusively of fecal origin and their presence is thus an effective confirmation of fecal contamination. Most strains of "E. coli" are harmless, but some can cause serious illness in humans. Infection symptoms and signs include bloody diarrhea, stomach cramps, vomiting and occasionally, fever. The bacteria can also cause pneumonia, other respiratory illnesses and urinary tract infections.

An easy way to differentiate between different types of coliform bacteria is by using an eosin methylene blue agar plate. This plate is partially inhibitory to Gram (+) bacteria, and will produce a color change in the Gram (-) bacterial colonies based on lactose fermentation abilities. Strong lactose fermenters will appear as dark blue/purple/black, and "E.coli" (which also ferments lactose) colonies will be dark colored, but will also appear to have a metallic green sheen. Other coliform bacteria will appear as thick, slimy colonies, with non-fermenters being colorless, and weak fermenters being pink.


</doc>
<doc id="18083680" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18083680" title="Ultramicrobacteria">
Ultramicrobacteria

Ultramicrobacteria are bacteria that are smaller than 0.1 μm under all growth conditions. This term was coined in 1981, describing cocci in seawater that were less than 0.3 μm in diameter. Ultramicrobacteria have also been recovered from soil and appear to be a mixture of Gram-positive, Gram-negative and cell-wall-lacking species. Ultramicrobacteria possess a relatively high surface-area-to-volume ratio due to their small size, which aids in growth under oligotrophic (i.e. nutrient-poor) conditions. The relatively small size of ultramicrobacteria also enables parasitism of larger organisms; some ultramicrobacteria have been observed to be obligate or facultative parasites of various eukaryotes and prokaryotes. One factor allowing ultramicrobacteria to achieve their small size seems to be genome minimization such as in the case of the ultramicrobacterium "P. ubique" whose small 1.3 Mb genome is seemingly devoid of extraneous genetic elements like nonworking genes, transposons, extrachromosomal elements etc. However, genomic data from ultramicrobacteria is lacking since the study of ultramicrobacteria, like many other prokaryotes, is hindered by difficulties in cultivating them.

Ultramicrobacteria are commonly confused with ultramicrocells, the latter of which are the dormant, stress-resistant forms of larger cells that form under starvation conditions (ie. these larger cells downregulate their metabolism, stop growing and stabilize their DNA to create ultramicrocells that remain viable for years) whereas the small size of ultramicrobacteria is not a starvation response and is consistent even under nutrient-rich conditions.

The term "nanobacteria" is sometimes used synonymously with ultramicrobacteria in the scientific literature, but ultramicrobacteria are distinct from the purported nanobacteria or "calcifying nanoparticles", which were proposed to be living organisms that were 0.1 μm in diameter. These structures are now thought to be non-living, and likely precipitated particles of inorganic material.



</doc>
<doc id="18180411" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18180411" title="Siderophilic bacteria">
Siderophilic bacteria

Siderophilic bacteria are bacteria that require or are facilitated by free iron. They may include "Vibrio vulnificus", "Listeria monocytogenes", "Yersinia enterocolica", "Salmonella enterica" (serotype Typhimurium), "Klebsiella pneumoniae" and "Escherichia coli". One possible symptom of haemochromatosis is susceptibility to infections from these species.
Certain non-bacterial microorganisms such as "Rhizopus arrhizus" and "Mucor" may also be siderophilic.



</doc>
<doc id="21294873" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21294873" title="Acidophiles in acid mine drainage">
Acidophiles in acid mine drainage

The outflow of acidic liquids and other pollutants from mines is often catalysed by acid-loving microorganisms; these are the acidophiles in acid mine drainage.

Acidophiles are not just present in exotic environments such as Yellowstone National Park or deep-sea hydrothermal vents. Genera such as "Acidithiobacillus" and "Leptospirillum" bacteria, and "Thermoplasmatales archaea", are present in syntrophic relationships in the more mundane environments of concrete sewer pipes and implicated in the heavy-metal-containing, sulfurous waters of rivers such as the Rheidol.

Such microorganisms are responsible for the phenomenon of acid mine drainage (AMD) and thus are important both economically and from a conservation perspective. Control of these acidophiles and their harnessing for industrial biotechnology shows their effect need not be entirely negative.

The use of acidophilic organisms in mining is a new technique for extracting trace metals through bioleaching, and offers solutions for the phenomenon of acid mine drainage in mining spoils.

Upon exposure to oxygen (O) and water (HO), metal sulfides undergo oxidation to produce metal-rich acidic effluent. If the pH is low enough to overcome the natural buffering capacity of the surrounding rocks (‘calcium carbonate equivalent’ or ‘acid neutralising capacity’), the surrounding area may become acidic, as well as contaminated with high levels of heavy metals. Though acidophiles have an important place in the iron and sulfur biogeochemical cycles, strongly acidic environments are overwhelmingly anthropogenic in cause, primarily created at the cessation of mining operations where sulfide minerals, such as pyrite (iron disulfide or FeS), are present.

Acid mine drainage may occur in the mine itself, the spoil heap (particularly colliery spoils from coal mining), or through some other activity that exposes metal sulfides at a high concentration, such as at major construction sites. Banks "et al." provide a basic summary of the processes that occur:

The oxidation of metal sulfide (by oxygen) is slow without colonization by acidophiles, particularly "Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans" (synonym "Thiobacillus ferrooxidans"). These bacteria can accelerate pyritic oxidation by 10 times. In that study, a proposal for the rate at which "A.ferrooxidans" can oxidise pyrite is the ability to use ferrous iron to generate a ferric iron catalyst :

Under the above acidic conditions, ferric iron (Fe) is a more potent oxidant than oxygen, resulting in faster pyrite oxidation rates.

"A.ferrooxidans" is a chemolithoautotrophic bacteria, due to the oligotrophic nature (low dissolved organic carbon concentration) of acidic environments, and their lack of illumination for phototrophy. Even when in vadose conditions, "A.ferrooxidans" can survive, if the rock retains moisture and the mine is aerated. In fact in this situation, with pioneer microorganisms, the limiting factor is likely to be the environmental circumneutral pH, which inhibits many acidophiles' growth. However, favourable geochemical conditions quickly develop with an acidic interface between the bacteria and the mineral surface, and pH is lowered to a level closer to acidophilic optimum.

The process proceeds through "A.ferrooxidans" exhibiting a quorum level for the trigger of acid mine drainage (AMD). At first colonisation of metal sulfides there is no AMD, and as the bacteria grow into microcolonies, AMD remains absent, then at a certain colony size, the population begins to produce a measurable change in water chemistry, and AMD escalates. This means pH is not a clear measure of a mine's liability to AMD; culturing "A.ferrooxidans" (or others) gives a definite indication of a future AMD issue.

Other bacteria also implicated in AMD include "Leptospirillum ferrooxidans", "Acidithiobacillus thiooxidans" and "Sulfobacillus thermosulfidooxidans".

Though proteobacteria display impressive acid tolerance, most retain a circumneutral cytoplasm to avoid denaturation of their acid-labile cell constituents. Archaea such as "Ferroplasma acidiphilum", which oxidises ferrous iron, have a number of intracellular enzymes with an optimum similar to that of their external acidic environment. This may explain their ability to survive pH as low as 1.3. The differing cell membranes in archaea compared to the bacteria may hold part of the explanation; ether lipids that link isoprene, compared to proteobacteria's di-ester linkage, are central to the difference. Though lacking a cell wall, "F. acidiphilum" cell membranes contain caldarchaetidylglycerol tetraether lipids, which effectively block almost all proton access, "Thermoplasma acidophilum" also uses these bulky isoprenoid cores in its phospholipid bilayer.

It is possible that the family Ferroplasmaceae may in fact be more important in AMD than the current paradigm, Acidithiobacillaceae. From a practical viewpoint this changes little, as despite the myriad physiological differences between archaea and bacteria, treatments would remain the same; if pH is kept high, and water and oxygen are prohibited from the pyrite, the reaction will be negligible.

The isolation from solfataric soils of two Picrophilus species of archaea "P.oshimae" and "P.torridus" are of note for their record low of survival at pH 0, indicating that further AMD microorganisms may remain to be found which operate at an even lower pH. Though the genus Picrophilus is not known to be involved in AMD, its extreme acidophily is of interest, for instance its proton-resistant liposomes, which could be present in AMD acidophiles.

Tentatively, there may be examples of syntrophy between acidophilic species, and even cross-domain cooperation between archaea and bacteria. One mutalistic example is the rotation of iron between species; ferrous-oxidising chemolithotrophs use iron as an electron donor, then ferric-reducing heterotrophs use iron as an electron-acceptor.

Another more synergistic behaviour is the faster oxidation of ferrous iron when "A.ferrooxidans" and "Sulfobacillus thermosulfidooxidans" are combined in low-CO culture. "S.thermosulfidooxidans" is a more efficient iron-oxidiser, but this is usually inhibited by low-CO uptake. "A.ferrooxidans" has a higher affinity for the gas, but a lower iron oxidation speed, and so can supply "S.thermosulfidooxidans" for mutual benefit.

The community possesses diversity beyond the bacteria and archaea however; the approximately constant pH present during acid mine drainage make for a reasonably stable environment, with a community that spans a number of trophic levels, and includes obligately acidophilic eukaryotes such as fungi, yeasts, algae and protozoa.

Acidophiles display a great range of adaptations to not just tolerating, but thriving in an extreme pH environment (the definition of an acidophile being an organism that has a pH optimum below pH 3). Principal in these is the necessity of maintaining a large pH gradient, to ensure a circumneutral cytoplasm (normally, however not in Picrophilus species). The archaeans have already been discussed above, and further information on their and bacterial adaptations are in basic form in the Figure. To elaborate upon the figure, the bacteria also use membrane proton blocking to maintain a high cytoplasmic pH, which is a passive system as even non-respiring "A.ferrooxidans" exhibit it. Acidophiles are also able to extrude protons against the pH gradient with unique transport proteins, a process more difficult for moderate- and hyper-thermophiles; a higher temperature causes cell membranes to become more permeable to protons, necessarily leading to increased H influx, in the absence of other membrane alterations.

To grow at low pH, acidophiles must maintain a pH gradient of several pH units across the cellular membrane. Acidophiles harness the strong proton motive force (PMF), caused by the pH gradient across their cell membrane, for ATP production. A large amount of energy is available to the acidophile through proton movement across the membrane, but with it comes cytoplasmic acidity. Instead ions such as sodium can be used as a substitute energy transducer to avoid this pH increase (ATPases are often Na linked, rather than H linked).

Alternatively bacteria can use H containing vesicles to avoid cytoplasmic acidity (see Figure), but most require that any H taken in must be extruded after use in the electron transport chain (ETC).
On the subject of the ETC, an adaptation to living in the mine environment is in the use of different ETC electron acceptors to neutralophiles; sulfur, arsenic, selenium, uranium, iron, and manganese in solid form rather than O (most commonly Fe in dissimilatory iron reduction, frequent in AMD).

Genomic adaptations are also present, but not without complications in organisms like Thermoplasmatales archaea, which is both acidophilic and thermophilic. For instance, this Order expresses an increased concentration of purine-containing codons for heat-stability, whilst increasing pyramidine codons in long open reading frames for protection from acid-stress. More generally, and presumably to reduce the chances of an acid-hydrolysis mutation, all obligate hyperacidophiles have truncated genomes when compared to neutralophile microorganisms. "Picrophilus torridus", for instance, has the highest coding density of any non-parasitic aerobic microorganism living on organic substrates.

Acidophiles also benefit from improved DNA and protein repair systems such as chaperones involved in protein refolding. The "P.torridus" genome just mentioned contains a large numbers of genes concerned with repair proteins.

Bioremediation is the primary biotech issue created by the AMD acidophiles. There are a number of methods for dealing with AMD, some crude (such as raising pH through liming, removing water, binding iron with organic wastes) and some less so (application of bactericides, biocontrol with other bacteria/archaea, offsite wetland creation, use of metal-immobilising bacteria, galvanic suppression). A number of other neutralising agents are available (pulverised fuel ash-based grouts, cattle manure, whey, brewer's yeast) many which solve a waste disposal problem from another industry.

As supplies of some metals dwindle, other methods of extraction are being explored, including the use of acidophiles, in a process known as bioleaching. Though slower than conventional methods, the microorganisms (which can also include fungi) enable the exploitation of extremely low grade ores with minimum expense. Projects include nickel extraction with "A.ferrooxidans" and "Aspergillus sp." fungi and sulfur removal from coal with "Acidithiobacillus sp.". The extraction can occur at the mine site, from waste water streams (or the main watercourse if the contamination has reached that far), in bioreactors, or at a power station (for instance to remove sulfur from coal before combustion to avoid sulfuric acid rain).

AMD continues to be important in the River Rheidol, and in the near future further treatment will be needed in the area around Aberystwyth, which contains 38 of the 50 worst polluting metal mines in Wales.

In 2007, the UK government endorsed a return to coal as an energy source and mining in the UK is increasing (for instance the open-cast coal pit at Ffos-y-fran, Merthyr Tydfil). Much preventative work will be required to avoid the AMD associated with the last generation of coal mines.

The fast and efficient protein and DNA repair systems show promise for human medical uses, particularly with regard to cancer and ageing. However further research is required to determine whether these systems really are qualitatively different, and how that can be applied from microorganisms to humans.

As discussed above, acidophiles can have the option to use electron acceptors other than oxygen. Johnson (1998) points out that facultative anaerobism of acidophiles, previously dismissed, could have major implications for AMD control. Further research is needed to determine how far current methods to block oxygen will working, in light of the fact that the reaction may be able to continue anaerobically.



</doc>
<doc id="21457419" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21457419" title="Bacterial cellular morphologies">
Bacterial cellular morphologies

Bacteria and Archaea are classified by direct examination with the light microscope according to their morphology and arrangement.

The basic morphologies are spheres (coccus) and round-ended cylinders (bacillus). But there may be others such as helically twisted cylinders (spirochetes), cylinders curved in one plane (selenomonads) and unusual morphologies (such as the square, flat box-shaped cells of the archaean genus "Haloquadratum)". Arrangements include pairs, tetrads, clusters, chains and palisades.

A coccus (plural "cocci", from the Latin "coccinus" (scarlet) and derived from the Greek "kokkos" (berry)) is any microorganism (usually bacteria) whose overall shape is spherical or nearly spherical. Describing a bacterium as a coccus, or sphere, distinguishes it from bacillus, or rod. This is the first of many taxonomic traits for identifying and classifying a bacterium according to binomial nomenclature.

Important human diseases caused by coccoid bacteria include staphylococcal infections, some types of food poisoning, some urinary tract infections, toxic shock syndrome, gonorrhea, as well as some forms of meningitis, throat infections, pneumonias, and sinusitis.

Coccoid bacteria often occur in characteristic arrangements and these forms have specific names as well; listed here are the basic forms as well as representative bacterial genera:

A bacillus (plural bacilli) is a rod-shaped bacterium. Although "Bacillus", capitalized and italicized, specifically refers to the genus, the word bacillus (plural "bacilli") may also be used to describe any rod-shaped bacterium, and in this sense, bacilli are found in many different taxonomic groups of bacteria. There is no connection between the shape of a bacterium and its colors in the Gram staining.

Bacilli usually divide in the same plane and are solitary, but can combine to form diplobacilli, streptobacilli, and palisades.


A coccobacillus (plural "coccobacilli") is a type of rod-shaped bacteria. The word "coccobacillus" reflects an intermediate shape between "coccus" (spherical) and "bacillus" (elongated). Coccobacilli rods are so short and wide that they resemble cocci. "Haemophilus influenzae" and "Chlamydia trachomatis" are coccobacilli. "Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans" is a gram negative coccobacillus which is prevalent in subgingival plaques. "Acinetobacter" strains may grow on solid media as coccobacilli.

"Coxiella burnetti" is also a coccobacillus.

Spiral bacteria are another major bacterial cell morphology. Spiral bacteria can be sub-classified as spirilla, spirochetes, or vibrios based on the number of twists per cell, cell thickness, cell flexibility, and motility.

Bacteria are known to evolve specific traits to survive in their ideal environment. Bacteria-caused illnesses hinge on the bacteria’s physiology and their ability to interact with their environment, including the ability to shapeshift. Researchers discovered a protein that allows the bacterium "Vibrio cholerae" to morph into a corkscrew shape that likely helps it twist into — and then escape — the protective mucus that lines the inside of the gut.




</doc>
<doc id="22215454" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22215454" title="Catabolite repression">
Catabolite repression

Carbon catabolite repression, or simply catabolite repression, is an important part of global control system of various bacteria and other micro-organisms. Catabolite repression allows micro-organisms to adapt quickly to a preferred (rapidly metabolisable) carbon and energy source first. This is usually achieved through inhibition of synthesis of enzymes involved in catabolism of carbon sources other than the preferred one. The catabolite repression was first shown to be initiated by glucose and therefore sometimes referred to as the glucose effect. However, the term "glucose effect" is actually a misnomer since other carbon sources are known to induce catabolite repression.

Catabolite repression was extensively studied in "Escherichia coli". "E. coli" grows faster on glucose than on any other carbon source. For example, if "E. coli" is placed on an agar plate containing only glucose and lactose, the bacteria will use glucose first and lactose second. When glucose is available in the environment, the synthesis of β-galactosidase is under repression due to the effect of catabolite repression caused by glucose. The catabolite repression in this case is achieved through the utilization of phosphotransferase system.

An important enzyme from the phosphotransferase system called Enzyme II A (EIIA) plays a central role in this mechanism. There are different catabolite-specific EIIA in a single cell, even though different bacterial groups have specificities to different sets of catabolites. In enteric bacteria one of the EIIA enzymes in their set is specific for glucose transport only. When glucose levels are high inside the bacteria, EIIA mostly exists in its unphosphorylated form. This leads to inhibition of adenylyl cyclase and lactose permease, therefore cAMP levels are low and lactose can not be transported inside the bacteria.

Once the glucose is all used up, the second preferred carbon source (i.e. lactose) has to be used by bacteria. Absence of glucose will "turn off" catabolite repression. When glucose levels are low, the phosphorylated form of EIIA accumulates and consequently activates the enzyme adenylyl cyclase, which will produce high levels of cAMP. cAMP binds to catabolite activator protein (CAP) and together they will bind to a promoter sequence on the lac operon. However, this is not enough for the lactose genes to be transcribed. Lactose must be present inside the cell to remove the lactose repressor from the operator sequence (transcriptional regulation). When these two conditions are satisfied, it means for the bacteria that glucose is absent and lactose is available. Next, bacteria start to transcribe the lac operon and produce β-galactosidase enzymes for lactose metabolism. The example above is a simplification of a complex process. Catabolite repression is considered to be a part of global control system and therefore it affects more genes rather than just lactose gene transcription.

Gram positive bacteria such as "Bacillus subtilis" have a cAMP-independent catabolite repression mechanism controlled by catabolite control protein A (CcpA). In this alternative pathway CcpA negatively represses other sugar operons so they are off in the presence of glucose. It works by the fact that Hpr is phosphorylated by a specific mechanism, when glucose enters through the cell membrane protein EIIC, and when Hpr is phosphoralated it can then allow CcpA to block transcription of the alternative sugar pathway operons at their respective cre sequence binding sites. Note that "E. coli" has a similar cAMP-independent catabolite repression mechanism that utilizes a protein called catabolite repressor activator (Cra).



</doc>
<doc id="12197034" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12197034" title="SCOBY">
SCOBY

A SCOBY (or SCOBAY), short for "symbiotic culture of bacteria and yeast", is a syntrophic mixed culture of bacteria and yeast used in production of several traditional foods and beverages.

The species comprising the mixed cultures vary from preparation to preparation, but generally include "Acetobacter" bacterial species, as well as various "Saccharomyces" and other yeast types.

Within a culture, anaerobic ethanol fermentation (by yeast), anaerobic organic acid fermentation (by bacteria), and aerobic ethanol oxidation to acetate (by bacteria) can all take place concurrently along an oxygen gradient. 

A gelatinous, cellulose-based biofilm called a "pellicle" forms at the air-liquid interface and is also sometimes referred to as a "scoby". Either samples of this pellicle or unpasteurized kombucha can be used similarly to mother of vinegar to begin fermentation in pasteurized sweet tea. 

Scoby cultures used in beverage production can produce a pancake-sized dish-like structure that looks somewhat like the top of a mushroom, hence its nickname "mushroom". It often forms in vinegar in jars of pickled foods.

Foods and beverages which require a similar "symbiotic culture" in their production include:

Queensland University of Technology and the State Library of Queensland have been using kombucha scoby to produce a workable bio-textile, called a "vegan leather".





</doc>
<doc id="24211366" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24211366" title="ALIL pseudoknot">
ALIL pseudoknot

ALIL pseudoknot is an RNA element that induces frameshifting in bacteria. The expression of a minority of genes requires frameshifting to occur where the frequency of frameshifting is increased by a RNA secondary structure located on the 3' side of the shift site. This structure can be either a pseudoknot or a stem-loop and acts as a physical barrier to mRNA translocation so therefore causes ribosome pausing. 

ALIL pseudoknot was identified though comparative analysis of the a class of transposable elements belonging to the insertion sequence 3 (IS3) family and is shown to be conserved across a number of bacteria species. This pseudoknot stimulates programmed -1 ribosomal frameshifting (PRF-1) which in turn stimulates the express of transposase, an enzyme required for transposition. Mutagenesis and chemical probing were used to determine the secondary structure of this pseudoknot and it has been proposed that this pseudoknot is formed by interactions between an apical loop and internal loop.


</doc>
<doc id="26135488" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26135488" title="Bacterial glutathione transferase">
Bacterial glutathione transferase

Bacterial glutathione transferases (GSTs; EC 2.5.1.18) are part of a superfamily of enzymes that play a crucial role in cellular detoxification. The primary role of GSTs is to catalyze the conjugation of glutathione (GSH) with the electrophilic centers of a wide variety of molecules. The most commonly known substrates of GSTs are xenobiotic synthetic chemicals. There are also classes of GSTs that utilize glutathione as a cofactor rather than a substrate. Often these GSTs are involved in reduction of reactive oxidative species toxic to the bacterium. Conjugation with glutathione receptors reders toxic substances more soluble, and therefore more readily exocytosed from the cell.

Bacterial glutathione transferases are widely distributed in aerobic bacteria and are classified into several classes. These classes are organized according to the protein sequence and structure. In bacteria, the theta class GSTs includes all of the currently known bacterial glutathione transferases. Between classes, these proteins have less than 25% sequence identity, while members of the same class match about 40% amino acid sequence identity. In comparison to eukaryotes, studies have shown that most of the residues that are highly conserved in theta and other bacterial class GSTs are not retained in those of the alpha, mu, and pi classes of eukaryotic GSTs. The considerable amount of protein sequence variation has led to the general belief that GSTs carry out a very wide variety of glutathione-dependent conjugation functions. No other currently known proteins have the same overall topology as GST enzymes.

Bacterial glutathione transferases are not detected in anaerobic bacteria or archaea. These antioxidant enzymes are a part of the glutathione biosynthetic pathway, which is present in cyanobacteria, proteobacteria, and certain Gram-negative bacteria. 

Bacterial GSTs are involved in a variety of distinct processes such as biotransformation of toxic compounds, protection against several stresses, and antibacterial drug resistance. GSTs also have important roles in metabolism, such as signaling-ligand biosynthesis, tyrosine depredation, peroxide breakdown, and dehydroascorbate reduction.

As the key substrate in GST-mediated reactions, glutathione is one of the most conserved reducing agents in bacterial cells. In its reduced form, glutathione plays a key role in the regulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) in the cell. ROS are specific to aerobic cells and are usually produced in their metabolic processes. They function to maintain a dynamic balance under normal conditions, acting as intracellular and extracellular signaling molecules. The regulation of levels of ROS, levels of oxidized and reduced glutathione and other thiols, and antioxidant enzymes (such as GSTs and glutathione reductase) are important in determination of the most stable conditions for redox control, or for activation of apoptosis. Glutathione reductase is another enzyme that helps maintain cellular redox homeostasis by maintaining the supply of reduced glutathione. Without glutathione in its reduced form, glutathione transferases are not able to utilize it as a substrate in redox reactions.

Glutathione contains a significant amount of cysteine residues, which contributes to its nature of being readily oxidized. The -SH groups on these residues act as strong nucleophiles, which can conjugate with a variety of molecules, including other glutathione molecules. Sulfur itself is able to exist in several different oxidation states; this redox flexibility combined with its strong nucleophilic properties allows glutathione to oxidize/readily pick up electrons from reactive oxygen species. Glutathione transferases play a key role in catalyzing such reactions. 

Bacterial glutathione transferases of all classes are homodimeric enzymes (although heterodimeric isozymes of certain classes are also known). Monomers fold into a two-domain configuration to form the active enzyme structure. These globular proteins have an N-terminal domain that consists of a mixture of alpha-helices and beta strands, while the C-terminal domain is all-helical. 

The N-terminal domain contains the glutathione-binding site and is a highly conserved region among all GSTs. This domain has a similar composition to thioredoxins, which act as antioxidants by facilitating the reduction of other proteins. In comparison, the region that contains the greatest amount of variability between GST classes is contained in the alpha-2 helix on the C-terminal domain. The predominantly alpha-helical C-terminal domain is involved with the binding of hydrophobic substrates (such as hydrophobic portions of xenobiotics). The specificity of the alpha-2 helix stems from the assortment of amino acids in the domain that interacts with the glycine residue of glutathione. 

Bacterial glutathione transferases are specific to aerobic bacteria and mainly function in the detoxification of exogenous compounds and the relief of oxidative stress. 

Aerobic bacteria inevitably are prone to the formation of reactive oxygen species due to the nature of their respiration processes. Under normal conditions these ROS strive to maintain a dynamic balance; however, this balance can often be disrupted by biotic or abiotic stressors such as superoxide radicals, endogenous lipids, DNA hydroperoxides, hydrogen peroxide, hydroxyl radicals, and hydroxy alkenals. Therefore, these susceptible organisms have intrinsic mechanisms to protect from oxidative damage; glutathione plays a key role in most of these antioxidant mechanisms. 

Once reduced, glutathione interacts with these reactive oxygen and nitrogen species. This interaction is catalyzed by GSTs and their involvement is vital for successful oxidation of glutathione. GSTs bind the ROS substrate at its hydrophobic alpha-helical C-terminal domain, as well as reduced glutathione to its glutathione-binding site on the N-terminal domain. These two domains are adjacent to each other on the enzyme, and together form the active site of the GST where the redox reaction occurs. Once both substrates are bound at the enzyme’s active site, the monomeric GST interacts with another substrate- bound GST monomer and catalyzes a disulphide bridge between the two glutathione molecules. This yields the active dimeric enzyme structure. The reactive oxygen species then donates one electron to a glutathione molecule, completing the oxidation-reduction reaction and rendering the it unable to perform oxidative damage to the cell. 

After completion of this reaction, glutathione reductase recycles oxidized glutathione back to the reduced form so that it again can be picked up by GSTs. This glutathione system acts as the major reduction-oxidation buffer in aerobic bacterial cells, contributing to the overall reduced cellular environment of the cytosol. 

One of the primary roles of bacterial glutathione transferases is to reduce the toxic effects of xenobiotics from the cell using the phase II system of detoxification metabolism. Xenobiotics are compounds foreign to the bacterium’s natural biochemistry, and phase II of their detoxification involves conjugating them to polar, soluble compounds that can be safely excreted from the cell. 

GSTs are essential in this process because they catalyze the nucleophilic attack of glutathione on various electrophilic residues of xenobiotic substrates, thereby preventing their disruption of vital cellular proteins and nucleic acids. Similar to the mechanism GSTs use for catalyzation of redox reactions, the mechanism for detoxification first involves the binding of two substrates to the enzyme. A GST monomer binds a glutathione molecule to its N-terminal glutathione-binding site. On the adjacent hydrophobic alpha-helical binding site on the C-terminal domain, the GST binds a hydrophobic xenobiotic molecule. Formation of the active site recruits another GST monomer to interact with the system and the enzymes dimerize. The active GST complex catalyzes the -SH residue on glutathione to perform a nucleophilic attack on electrophilic carbon, sulfur, or nitrogen atoms of the xenobiotic substrate. The conjugation of glutathione on the previously hydrophobic-toxic substrate results in a soluble compound, which is more readily exocytosed by the cell. 



</doc>
<doc id="26210379" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26210379" title="Viable but nonculturable">
Viable but nonculturable

Viable but nonculturable (VBNC) bacteria refers to bacteria that are in a state of very low metabolic activity and do not divide, but are alive and have the ability to become culturable once resuscitated.

Bacteria in a VBNC state cannot grow on standard growth media, though flow cytometry can measure the viability of the bacteria. Bacteria can enter the VBNC state as a response to stress, due to adverse nutrient, temperature, osmotic, oxygen, and light conditions. The cells that are in the VBNC state are morphologically smaller, and demonstrate reduced nutrient transport, rate of respiration, and synthesis of macromolecules. Sometimes, VBNC bacteria can remain in that state for over a year. It has been shown that numerous pathogens and non-pathogens can enter the VBNC state, and therefore it has significant implications in pathogenesis, bioremediation, and other branches of microbiology.

The existence of the VBNC state is controversial. The validity and interpretation of the assays to determine the VBNC state have been questioned.

Species known to enter a VBNC state:


</doc>
<doc id="14508339" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14508339" title="Indicator organism">
Indicator organism

Indicator organisms are used as a proxy to monitor conditions in a particular environment, ecosystem, area, habitat, or consumer product. Certain bacteria, fungi and helminth eggs are being used for various purposes.

Certain bacteria can be used as indicator organisms in particular situations. The presence of bacteria commonly found in human feces, termed coliform bacteria (e.g. "E. coli"), in surface water is a common indicator of faecal contamination. For this reason, sanitation programs often test water for the presence of these organisms to ensure that drinking water systems are not contaminated with feces. This testing can be done using several methods which generally involve taking samples of water, or passing large amounts of water through a filter to sample bacteria, then testing to see if bacteria from that water grow on selective media such as MacConkey agar. Alternatively, the sample can be tested to see if it utilizes various nutrients in ways characteristic of coliform bacteria.

Coliform bacteria selected as indicators of faecal contamination must not persist in the environment for long periods of time following efflux from the intestine, and their presence must be closely correlated with contamination by other faecal organisms. Indicator organisms need not be pathogenic.

Non-coliform bacteria, such as "Streptococcus bovis" and certain clostridia may also be used as an index of faecal contamination.

"Penicillium" species, "Aspergillus niger" and "Candida albicans" are used in the pharmaceutical industry for microbial limit testing, bioburden assessment, method validation, antimicrobial challenge tests, and quality control testing. When used in this capacity, "Penicillium" and "A. niger" are compendial mold indicator organisms.

Molds such as "Trichoderma", "Exophiala", "Stachybotrys", "Aspergillus fumigatus", "Aspergillus versicolor", "Phialophora", "Fusarium", "Ulocladium" and certain yeasts are used as indicators of indoor air quality.

Helminth eggs (or ova) are a good indicator organism to assess the safety of sanitation and wastewater reuse systems for resource recovery because they are the most environmentally resistant pathogens of all pathogens (viruses, bacteria, protozoa and helminths) and can in extreme cases survive for several years in soil.



</doc>
<doc id="11094525" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11094525" title="Asymmetric bacterium">
Asymmetric bacterium

Asymmetric bacteria are bacteria that undergo "non-symmetrical" life cycles. This especially includes those that differentiate temporally, such as prosthecate bacteria.

Cell division asymmetries have appeared alongside the evolution of complex developmental processes. While bacteria were historically considered symmetric simple cells, this idea has been overturned by novel technology and observation techniques. However, asymmetric bacteria remain difficult to detect. Asymmetrical growth aids in determining the age of bacteria, because it gives rise to an "old pole", or region of inert cell wall material found at the ends of a rod-shaped bacterial cell. Following the "old pole" of the cell wall material allows an observer to create a bacterial lineage.

Bacteria exhibit three different types of asymmetry: conditional asymmetry, reproductive asymmetry, and morphological asymmetry.

Conditional asymmetry is well defined in the case of endospore formation, which is triggered by stressful environmental conditions such as increased heat, pH change, and nutrient depletion. This type of asymmetry is usually seen in Bacilli and Clostridia.

Reproductive asymmetry is classically linked to bacterial budding, where a mother cell concentrates cell wall material to one area and a daughter cell begins to bud from that thickening. Cell growth which gives rise to reproductive asymmetry occurs in three phases: stalk elongation, daughter cell elongation, and septum formation.

Morphological asymmetry is classified by polar elongation. In this type of asymmetrical growth, the daughter cell receives most of the new cell wall material.



</doc>
<doc id="2820241" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2820241" title="Coccobacillus">
Coccobacillus

A coccobacillus (plural coccobacilli) is a type of bacterium with a shape intermediate between cocci (spherical bacteria) and bacilli (rod-shaped bacteria). Coccobacilli, then, are very short rods which may be mistaken for cocci.

"Haemophilus influenzae", "Gardnerella vaginalis", and "Chlamydia trachomatis" are coccobacilli. "Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans" is a Gram-negative coccobacillus prevalent in subgingival plaques. "Acinetobacter" strains may grow on solid media as coccobacilli. "Bordetella pertussis" is a Gram-negative coccobacillus responsible for causing whooping cough. "Yersinia pestis", the bacteria that causes plague, is also coccobacillus.

"Coxiella burnetti" is also a coccobacillus. Bacteria from the genus "Brucella" are medically important coccobacilli that cause brucellosis. "Haemophilus ducreyi", another medically important Gram-negative coccobacillus, is observed in sexually transmitted disease, chancroid, of Third World countries.


</doc>
<doc id="20144342" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20144342" title="Bacterial anaerobic corrosion">
Bacterial anaerobic corrosion

Bacterial anaerobic corrosion is a bacterially-induced oxidation of metals.

In a humid environment and anoxic conditions the corrosion of metals occurs as a result of a redox reaction that generates molecular hydrogen from hydrogen ions, requiring bacteria, unlike anaerobic corrosion that occurs spontaneously.

A base metal, such as iron (Fe) goes into aqueous solution as positively charged cation, Fe. As the metal is oxidized under anaerobic condition by the protons of water, H ions are reduced to form molecular H. This can be written in the following ways under acidic and neutral conditions respectively:

Usually, a thin film of molecular hydrogen forms on the metal. Sulfate-reducing bacteria, oxidize the molecular hydrogen to produce hydrogen sulfide ions (HS) and water:

The iron ions partly precipitate to form iron (II) sulfide. A reaction with water also occurs, producing iron hydroxide.

The net equation comes to:

This form of corrosion by sulfate-reducing bacteria can, in this way, be far more harmful than anaerobic corrosion.




</doc>
<doc id="29071142" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29071142" title="P ring">
P ring

The P ring forms part of the basal body of the bacterial appendage known as the flagellum. It is known to be embedded in the peptidoglycan cell wall. Together with the L ring, it has the function of anchoring the flagellum to the cell surface.


</doc>
<doc id="29363365" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=29363365" title="Segmented filamentous bacteria">
Segmented filamentous bacteria

Segmented filamentous bacteria or "Candidatus" Savagella are members of the gut microbiota of rodents, fish and chickens, and have been shown to potently induce immune responses in mice. They form a distinct lineage within the Clostridiaceae and the name "Candidatus" Savagella has been proposed for this lineage.

They were previously named "Candidatus" Arthromitus because of their morphological resemblance to bacterial filaments previously observed in the guts of insects by Joseph Leidy.

Despite the fact that they have been widely referred to as segmented filamentous bacteria, this term is somewhat problematic as it does not allow one to distinguish between bacteria that colonize various hosts or even if segmented filamentous bacteria are actually several different bacterial species. In mice, these bacteria grow primarily in the terminal ileum in close proximity to the intestinal epithelium where they are thought to help induce T helper 17 cell responses.

Intriguingly, Segmented Filamentous Bacteria were found to expand in AID-deficient mice, which lack the ability to mount an appropriate humoral immune response because of impaired somatic hypermutation; parabiotic experiments revealed the importance of IgA in eliminating Segmented Filamentous Bacteria. This goes hand in hand with an earlier study demonstrating the ability of monocolonization with Segmented Filamentous Bacteria to dramatically increase mucosal IgA levels. Segmented Filamentous Bacteria are species specific, and may be important to immune development.


"Two review articles"


</doc>
<doc id="1431663" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1431663" title="Sulfate-reducing microorganisms">
Sulfate-reducing microorganisms

Sulfate-reducing microorganisms (SRM) or sulfate-reducing prokaryotes (SRP) are a group composed of sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB) and sulfate-reducing archaea (SRA), both of which can perform anaerobic respiration utilizing sulfate (SO) as terminal electron acceptor, reducing it to hydrogen sulfide (HS). Therefore, these sulfidogenic microorganisms "breathe" sulfate rather than molecular oxygen (O), which is the terminal electron acceptor reduced to water (HO) in aerobic respiration.

Most sulfate-reducing microorganisms can also reduce some other oxidized inorganic sulfur compounds, such as sulfite (SO), dithionite (SO), thiosulfate (SO), trithionate (SO), tetrathionate (SO), elemental sulfur (S), and polysulfides (S). Depending on the context, "sulfate-reducing microorganisms" can be used in a broader sense (including all species that can reduce any of these sulfur compounds) or in a narrower sense (including only species that reduce sulfate, and excluding strict thiosulfate and sulfur reducers, for example).

Sulfate-reducing microorganisms can be traced back to 3.5 billion years ago and are considered to be among the oldest forms of microbes, having contributed to the sulfur cycle soon after life emerged on Earth.

Many organisms reduce small amounts of sulfates in order to synthesize sulfur-containing cell components; this is known as "assimilatory sulfate reduction". By contrast, the sulfate-reducing microorganisms considered here reduce sulfate in large amounts to obtain energy and expel the resulting sulfide as waste; this is known as dissimilatory sulfate reduction. They use sulfate as the terminal electron acceptor of their electron transport chain. Most of them are anaerobes; however there are examples of sulfate-reducing microorganisms that are tolerant of oxygen, and some of them can even perform aerobic respiration. No growth is observed when oxygen is used as the electron acceptor.
In addition, there are sulfate-reducing microorganisms that can also reduce other electron acceptors, such as fumarate, nitrate (NO), nitrite (NO), ferric iron [Fe(III)], and dimethyl sulfoxide.

In terms of electron donor, this group contains both organotrophs and lithotrophs. The organotrophs oxidize organic compounds, such as carbohydrates, organic acids (e.g., formate, lactate, acetate, propionate, and butyrate), alcohols (methanol and ethanol), aliphatic hydrocarbons (including methane), and aromatic hydrocarbons (benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, and xylene). The lithotrophs oxidize molecular hydrogen (H), for which they compete with methanogens and acetogens in anaerobic conditions. Some sulfate-reducing microorganisms can directly utilize metallic iron [Fe(0)] as electron donor, oxidizing it to ferrous iron [Fe(II)].

Sulfate occurs widely in seawater, sediment, or water rich in decaying organic material. They are also found in more extreme environments such as hydrothermal vents, acid-mine drainage sites, oil fields, and the deep subsurface, including the world's oldest isolated ground water. Sulfate-reducing microorganisms are common in anaerobic environments where they aid in the degradation of organic materials. In these anaerobic environments, fermenting bacteria extract energy from large organic molecules; the resulting smaller compounds such as organic acids and alcohols are further oxidized by acetogens and methanogens and the competing sulfate-reducing microorganisms.
The toxic hydrogen sulfide is a waste product of sulfate-reducing microorganisms; its rotten egg odor is often a marker for the presence of sulfate-reducing microorganisms in nature. Sulfate-reducing microorganisms are responsible for the sulfurous odors of salt marshes and mud flats. Much of the hydrogen sulfide will react with metal ions in the water to produce metal sulfides. These metal sulfides, such as ferrous sulfide (FeS), are insoluble and often black or brown, leading to the dark color of sludge.

During the Permian–Triassic extinction event (250 million years ago) a severe anoxic event seems to have occurred where these forms of bacteria became the dominant force in oceanic ecosystems, producing copious amounts of hydrogen sulfide.

Sulfate-reducing bacteria also generate neurotoxic methylmercury as a byproduct of their metabolism, through methylation of inorganic mercury present in their surroundings. They are known to be the dominant source of this bioaccumulative form of mercury in aquatic systems.

Some sulfate-reducing microorganisms can reduce hydrocarbons, and they have been used to clean up contaminated soils. Their use has also been proposed for other kinds of contaminations.

Sulfate-reducing microorganisms are considered as a possible way to deal with acid mine waters that are produced by other microorganisms.

In engineering, sulfate-reducing microorganisms can create problems when metal structures are exposed to sulfate-containing water: Interaction of water and metal creates a layer of molecular hydrogen on the metal surface; sulfate-reducing microorganisms then oxidize the hydrogen while creating hydrogen sulfide, which contributes to corrosion.

Hydrogen sulfide from sulfate-reducing microorganisms also plays a role in the biogenic sulfide corrosion of concrete. It also occurs in sour crude oil.

Some sulfate-reducing microorganisms play a role in the anaerobic oxidation of methane:

An important fraction of the methane formed by methanogens below the seabed is oxidized by sulfate-reducing microorganisms in the transition zone separating the methanogenesis from the sulfate reduction activity in the sediments. This process is also considered a major sink for sulfate in marine sediments.

In hydraulic fracturing, fluids are used to frack shale formations to recover methane (shale gas) and hydrocarbons. Biocide compounds are often added to water to inhibit the microbial activity of sulfate-reducing microorganisms, in order to but not limited to, avoid anaerobic methane oxidation and the generation of hydrogen sulfide, ultimately resulting in minimizing potential production loss.

Before sulfate can be used as an electron acceptor, it must be activated. This is done by the enzyme ATP-sulfurylase, which uses ATP and sulfate to create adenosine 5'-phosphosulfate (APS). APS is subsequently reduced to sulfite and AMP. Sulfite is then further reduced to sulfide, while AMP is turned into ADP using another molecule of ATP. The overall process, thus, involves an investment of two molecules of the energy carrier ATP, which must to be regained from the reduction.

The enzyme dissimilatory (bi)sulfite reductase, "dsrAB" (EC 1.8.99.5), that catalyzes the last step of dissimilatory sulfate reduction, is the functional gene most used as a molecular marker to detect the presence of sulfate-reducing microorganisms.

The sulfate-reducing microorganisms have been treated as a phenotypic group, together with the other sulfur-reducing bacteria, for identification purposes. They are found in several different phylogenetic lines. As of 2009, 60 genera containing 220 species of sulfate-reducing bacteria are known.

Among the Deltaproteobacteria the orders of sulfate-reducing bacteria include Desulfobacterales, Desulfovibrionales, and Syntrophobacterales. This accounts for the largest group of sulfate-reducing bacteria, about 23 genera.

The second largest group of sulfate-reducing bacteria is found among the Firmicutes, including the genera "Desulfotomaculum", "Desulfosporomusa", and "Desulfosporosinus".

In the Nitrospirae division we find sulfate-reducing "Thermodesulfovibrio" species.

Two more groups that include thermophile sulfate-reducing bacteria are given their own phyla, the Thermodesulfobacteria and "Thermodesulfobium".

There are also three known genera of sulfate-reducing archaea: "Archaeoglobus", "Thermocladium" and "Caldivirga". They are found in hydrothermal vents, oil deposits, and hot springs.

In July 2019, a scientific study of Kidd Mine in Canada discovered organisms which live below the surface, and which breathe sulfur in order to survive. these organisms are also remarkable due to eating rocks such as pyrite as their regular food source. This discovery occurred in water that has been previously found to be the oldest water on Earth.



</doc>
<doc id="467649" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=467649" title="HACEK organisms">
HACEK organisms

The HACEK organisms are a group of fastidious Gram-negative bacteria that are an unusual cause of infective endocarditis, which is an inflammation of the heart due to bacterial infection. HACEK is an abbreviation of the initials of the genera of this group of bacteria: "Haemophilus", "Aggregatibacter" (previously "Actinobacillus"), "Cardiobacterium", "Eikenella", "Kingella". The HACEK organisms are a normal part of the human microbiota, living in the oral-pharyngeal region.

The bacteria were originally grouped because they were thought to be a significant cause of infective endocarditis, but recent research has shown that they are rare and only responsible for 1.4–3.0% of all cases of this disease.

HACEK originally referred to "Haemophilus parainfluenzae", "Haemophilus aphrophilus", "Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans", "Cardiobacterium hominis", "Eikenella corrodens", and "Kingella kingae". However, taxonomic rearrangements have changed the A to "Aggregatibacter" species and the H to "Haemophilus" species to reflect the recategorization and novel identification of many of the species in these genera. Some reviews of medical literature on HACEK organisms use the older classification, but recent papers are using the new classification.

A list of HACEK organisms:





All of these organisms are part of the normal oropharyngeal flora, which grow slowly (up to 14 days), prefer a carbon dioxide–enriched atmosphere, and share an enhanced capacity to produce endocardial infections, especially in young children. Collectively, they account for 5–10% of cases of infective endocarditis involving native valves and are the most common Gram-negative cause of endocarditis among people who do not use drugs intravenously. They have been a frequent cause of culture-negative endocarditis. Culture-negative refers to an inability to produce a colony on regular agar plates because these bacteria are fastidious (require a specific nutrient).

In addition to valvular infections in the heart, they can also produce other infections, such as bacteremia, abscess, peritonitis, otitis media, conjunctivitis, pneumonia, arthritis, osteomyelitis, and periodontal infections.

The treatment of choice for HACEK organisms in endocarditis is the third-generation cephalosporin and β-Lactam antibiotic ceftriaxone. Ampicillin (a penicillin), combined with low-dose gentamicin (an aminoglycoside) is another therapeutic option.


</doc>
<doc id="21115942" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21115942" title="Multidrug tolerance">
Multidrug tolerance

Multidrug tolerance or antibiotic tolerance is the ability of a disease-causing microorganism to resist being killed by antibiotics or other antimicrobials. It is mechanistically distinct from multidrug resistance: It is not caused by mutant microbes, but rather by microbial cells that exist in a transient, dormant, non-dividing state. Microorganisms that display multidrug tolerance can be bacteria, fungi or parasites.

Recognition of antibiotic tolerance dates back to 1944 when Joseph Bigger, an Irish physician working in England, was experimenting with the recently discovered penicillin. Bigger used penicillin to lyse a suspension of bacteria and then inoculated culture medium with the penicillin-treated liquid. Colonies of bacteria were able to grow after antibiotic killing. The important observation that Bigger made was that this new population could again be killed by penicillin except for a small residual population. Hence the residual organisms were not antibiotic resistant mutants but rather a subpopulation of what he called ‘persisters’. The formation of persisters is now known to be a common phenomenon that can occur by the formation of persister cells prior to the antibiotic treatment or in response to a variety of antibiotics.

Multidrug tolerance is caused by a small subpopulation of microbial cells termed persisters. Persisters are not mutants, but rather are dormant cells that can survive the antimicrobial treatments that kill the majority of their genetically identical siblings. Persister cells have entered a non- or extremely slow-growing physiological state which makes them insensitive (refractory or tolerant) to the action of antimicrobial drugs. When such persisting microbial cells cannot be eliminated by the immune system, they become a reservoir from which recurrence of infection will develop. Such non-growing bacteria have been observed to persist within mammalian cells. Indeed, it appears that persister cells are the main cause for relapsing and chronic infections. Chronic infections can affect people of any age, health, or immune status.

Bacterial multidrug or antibiotic tolerance poses medically important challenges. It is largely responsible for the inability to eradicate bacterial infections with antibiotic treatment. Persister cells are highly enriched in biofilms, and it has been suggested that this is the reason that makes biofilm-related diseases so hard to treat. Examples are chronic infections of implanted medical devices such as catheters and artificial joints, urinary tract infections, middle ear infections and fatal lung disease .

Unlike resistance, multidrug tolerance is a transient, non-heritable phenotype. Multidrug tolerant persister cells are not antibiotic resistant mutants. Resistance is caused by newly acquired genetic traits (by mutation or horizontal gene transfer) that are heritable and confer the ability to grow at elevated concentrations of antimicrobial drugs. In contrast, tolerant bacteria have the same MIC (Minimum Inhibitory Concentration) as susceptible bacteria and differ in the duration of the treatment that they can survive. Multidrug tolerance can be caused by a reversible physiological state in a small subpopulation of genetically identical cells, similar to a differentiated cell type. It enables this small subpopulation of microbes to survive the antibiotic killing of their surrounding siblings. Persisting cells resume growth when the antimicrobial agent is removed, and their progeny is sensitive to antimicrobial agents.

The molecular mechanisms that underlie persister cell formation and multidrug tolerance are largely unknown. Persister cells are thought to arise spontaneously in a growing microbial population by a stochastic genetic switch, although inducible mechanisms of persister cell formation have been described. For instance, Toxin-Antitoxin (TA) systems and a number of different stresses such as SOS-stress and envelope stress have been associated with persister formation. Owing to their transient nature and relatively low abundance, it is hard to isolate persister cells in sufficient numbers for experimental characterization, and only a few relevant genes have been identified to date. The best-understood persistence factor is the "E. coli" high persistence gene, commonly abbreviated as "hipA".

Although tolerance is widely considered a passive state, there is evidence indicating it can be an energy-dependent process. Persister cells in "E. coli" can transport intracellular accumulations antibiotic using an energy requiring efflux pump called TolC.

A persister subpopulation has also been demonstrated in budding yeast "Saccharomyces cerevisiae". Yeast persisters are triggered in a small subset of unperturbed exponentially growing cells by spontaneously occurring DNA damage, which leads to the activation of a general stress response and protection against a range of harsh drug and stress environments. As a result of the DNA damage, yeast persisters are also enriched for random genetic mutations that occurred prior to the stress, and are unrelated to the stress survival 

In May 2011, it was reported by Nature.com that the addition of certain metabolites can help suppress multidrug tolerance in numerous species of bacteria, including "E. coli" and "S. aureus", by "the generation of a proton-motive force which facilitates aminoglycoside uptake". Phage therapy, where applicable, entirely circumvents antibiotic tolerance.



</doc>
<doc id="30363426" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30363426" title="Candidate division TM7">
Candidate division TM7

Saccharibacteria, formerly known as "TM7", 
is a major lineage of Bacteria, the existence of which until recently was known solely through environmental 16S rRNA sequences as no species had been grown in the lab, a requirement for taxonomy, making it a candidate phylum. In a recent study, the first cultivated TM7 (TM7x) from the human oral cavity revealed that TM7 is an extremely small coccus (200-300 nm) has a distinctive lifestyle not previously observed in human-associated microbes. It is an obligate epibiont of various hosts, including "Actinomyces odontolyticus" strain (XH001) yet also has a parasitic phase thereby killing its host. The full genome sequence revealed a highly reduced genome (705kB) and a complete lack of amino acid biosynthetic capacity. An axenic culture of TM7 from the oral cavity was reported in 2014 but no sequence or culture was made available.
Along with Candidate Phylum TM6, it was named after sequences obtained in 1994 in an environmental study of a soil sample of peat bog from near Gifhorn, Lower Saxony, Germany (), where 262 PCR amplified 16S rDNA fragments were cloned into a plasmid vector, named TM clones for "" (lit. peat, middle layer).
It has been found in several environments since such as from activated sludges, water treatment plant sludge rainforest soil, human saliva, in association with sponges, cockroaches, gold mines, acetate-amended aquifer sediment, and other environments (bar thermophilic), making it an abundant and widespread phylum. Recently, TM7 rDNA and whole-cells were detected in activated sludge with >99.7% identity to a human skin TM7 and 98.6% identity to the human oral TM7a, suggesting metabolically active TM7 isolates in environmental sites may serve as model organisms to investigate the role TM7 species play in human health.

Species singled out with TM7 specific FISH probes form a bioreactor sludge revealed the presence of a gram-positive cell envelopes and several morphotypes: a sheathed filament (abundant), a rod occurring in short chains, a thick filament and cocci; the former may be the cause of Eikelboom type 0041 (bulking problems of activated sludges).
The majority of bacterial phyla are Gram-negative diderms, whereas only the Firmicutes, the Actinobacteria and Chloroflexi are monoderms. Candidate phylum TM7 is in fact a close relative of the Chloroflexi.

Using a polycarbonate membrane as a growth support and soil extract as the substrate, microcolonies of this clade were grown consisting of long filamentous rods up to 15 μm long with less than 50 cells or short rods with several hundred cells per colony, after 10 days incubation.

Thanks to a microfluidic chip allowing the isolation and amplification of the genome of a single cell, the genome of 3 long filament morphology cells with identical 16S rRNA were sequenced to create a draft sequence of the genome confirming some previously ascertained properties, elucidating some of its metabolic capabilities, revealing novel genes and hinting to potential pathogenic abilities.

Over 50 different phylotypes have been identified and it has a relatively modest intradivision 16S rDNA sequence divergence of 17%, which ranges from 13 to 33%. An interactive phylogenetic tree of TM7, built using jsPhyloSVG, allows for quick access to GenBank sequences and distance matrix calculations between tree branches.

Stable-isotope probing studies have found that some members of this phylum can degrade toluene.


</doc>
<doc id="3762839" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3762839" title="PelB leader sequence">
PelB leader sequence

The pelB leader sequence is a sequence of amino acids which, when attached to a protein, directs the protein to the bacterial periplasm, where the sequence is removed by a signal peptidase. Specifically, pelB refers to pectate lyase B of "Erwinia carotovora" CE. The leader sequence consists of the 22 N-terminal amino acid residues. This leader sequence can be attached to any other protein (on the DNA level) resulting in a transfer of such a fused protein to the periplasmic space of Gram-negative bacteria, such as "Escherichia coli", often used in genetic engineering.
Protein secretion can increase the stability of cloned gene products. For instance it was shown that the half-life of the recombinant proinsulin is increased 10-fold when the protein is secreted to the periplasmic space. (vijji. Narne, R.S.Ramya)

One of pelB's possible applications is to direct coat protein-antigen fusions to the cell surface for the construction of engineered bacteriophages for the purpose of phage display.



</doc>
<doc id="2798421" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2798421" title="Tissue gas">
Tissue gas

Tissue gas is the name given to the action of the bacteria "Clostridium perfringens" (formerly known as "C. welchii") in dead bodies. Its effect on the deceased is that of an extremely accelerated decomposition. It is only halted by embalming the body using special additive chemicals. It most commonly occurs in the bodies of people who have died of gangrene, large decubitus ulcers, necrotising fasciitis or who have had soil, faeces or water forced into wounds.


</doc>
<doc id="43938" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43938" title="Bacterial lawn">
Bacterial lawn

Bacterial lawn is a term used by microbiologists to describe the appearance of bacterial colonies when all the individual colonies on a Petri dish agar plate merge to form a field or mat of bacteria. Bacterial lawns find use in screens for antibiotic resistance and bacteriophage titering.

Bacterial lawns (often of "Serratia marcescens") are also used extensively when as an assay method when using bacteriophage as tracers in studies of groundwater flow.

Although occasionally used as a synonym for biofilm, the term primarily applies to the simple, clonal, unstructured mats of organisms that typically only form on laboratory growth media. Biofilms—the aggregated form of microorganisms most commonly found in nature— are generally more complex and diverse and marked by larger quantities of extracellular structural matrix relative to the cellular biomass.

Bacterial lawns can be produced manually by evenly spreading a high amount of bacteria onto an agar plate using a sterile cotton swab or a Drigalski spatula. Alternatively an automated machine can be used such as a spiral plater where the plate is rotated and the sample is spread evenly using an automated dispenser.



</doc>
<doc id="3434925" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3434925" title="Microbial corrosion">
Microbial corrosion

Microbial corrosion, also called bacterial corrosion, bio-corrosion, microbiologically influenced corrosion, or microbially induced corrosion (MIC), is corrosion caused or promoted by microorganisms, usually chemoautotrophs. It can apply to both metals and non-metallic materials.

Some sulfate-reducing bacteria produce hydrogen sulfide, which can cause sulfide stress cracking. "Acidithiobacillus" bacteria produce sulfuric acid; "Acidothiobacillus thiooxidans" frequently damages sewer pipes. "Ferrobacillus ferrooxidans" directly oxidizes iron to iron oxides and iron hydroxides; the rusticles forming on the RMS "Titanic" wreck are caused by bacterial activity. Other bacteria produce various acids, both organic and mineral, or ammonia.

In presence of oxygen, aerobic bacteria like "Acidithiobacillus thiooxidans", "Thiobacillus thioparus", and "Thiobacillus concretivorus", all three widely present in the environment, are the common corrosion-causing factors resulting in biogenic sulfide corrosion.

Without presence of oxygen, anaerobic bacteria, especially "Desulfovibrio" and "Desulfotomaculum", are common. "Desulfovibrio salixigens" requires at least 2.5% concentration of sodium chloride, but "D. vulgaris" and "D. desulfuricans" can grow in both fresh and salt water. "D. africanus" is another common corrosion-causing microorganism. The genus "Desulfotomaculum" comprises sulfate-reducing spore-forming bacteria; "Dtm. orientis" and "Dtm. nigrificans" are involved in corrosion processes. Sulfate-reducers require reducing environment; an electrode potential lower than -100 mV is required for them to thrive. However, even a small amount of produced hydrogen sulfide can achieve this shift, so the growth, once started, tends to accelerate.

Layers of anaerobic bacteria can exist in the inner parts of the corrosion deposits, while the outer parts are inhabited by aerobic bacteria.

Some bacteria are able to utilize hydrogen formed during cathodic corrosion processes.

Bacterial colonies and deposits can form concentration cells, causing and enhancing galvanic corrosion. .

Bacterial corrosion may appear in form of pitting corrosion, for example in pipelines of the oil and gas industry. Anaerobic corrosion is evident as layers of metal sulfides and hydrogen sulfide smell. On cast iron, a graphitic corrosion selective leaching may be the result, with iron being consumed by the bacteria, leaving graphite matrix with low mechanical strength in place.

Various corrosion inhibitors can be used to combat microbial corrosion. Formulae based on benzalkonium chloride are common in oilfield industry.

Microbial corrosion can also apply to plastics, concrete, and many other materials. Two examples are Nylon-eating bacteria and Plastic-eating bacteria.

Hydrocarbon utilizing microorganisms, mostly "Cladosporium resinae" and "Pseudomonas aeruginosa" and Sulfate Reducing Bacteria, colloquially known as "HUM bugs", are commonly present in jet fuel. They live in the water-fuel interface of the water droplets, form dark black/brown/green, gel-like mats, and cause microbial corrosion to plastic and rubber parts of the aircraft fuel system by consuming them, and to the metal parts by the means of their acidic metabolic products. They are also incorrectly called algae due to their appearance. FSII, which is added to the fuel, acts as a growth retardant for them. There are about 250 kinds of bacteria that can live in jet fuel, but fewer than a dozen are meaningfully harmful.

Microorganisms can negatively effect radioactive elements confined in nuclear waste .

Sewer network structures are prone to biodeterioration of
materials due to the action of some microorganisms associated to the sulfur cycle. It can be a severely damaging phenomenon which was firstly described by Olmstead and Hamlin in 1900 for a brick sewer located in Los Angeles. Jointed mortar between the bricks disintegrated and ironwork was heavily rusted. The mortar joint had ballooned to two to three times its original volume, leading to the destruction or the loosening of some bricks.

Around 9% of damages described in sewer networks can be ascribed to the successive action of two kinds of microorganisms. Sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB) can grow in relatively thick layers of sedimentary sludge and sand (typically 1 mm thick) accumulating at the bottom of the pipes and characterized by anoxic conditions. They can grow using oxidized sulfur compounds present in the effluent as electron acceptor and excrete hydrogen sulfide (HS). This gas is then emitted in the aerial part of the pipe and can impact the structure in two ways: either directly by reacting with the material and leading to a decrease in pH, or indirectly through its
use as a nutrient by sulfur-oxidizing bacteria (SOB), growing in oxic conditions, which produce biogenic sulfuric acid. The structure is then submitted to a biogenic sulfuric acid attack. Materials like calcium aluminate cements, PVC or vitrified clay pipe may be substituted for ordinary concrete or steel sewers that are not resistant in these environments.




Kobrin, G., "A Practical Manual on Microbiologically Influenced Corrosion", NACE, Houston, Texas, USA, 1993.

Heitz,E., Flemming HC., Sand, W., "Microbially Influenced Corrosion of Materials", Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 1996.

Videla, H., "Manual of Biocorrosion", CRC Press, 1996.

Javaherdashti, R., "Microbiologically Influenced Corrosion – An Engineering Insight", Springer, UK, 2008.

Tomei FA, Mitchell R (1986) "Development of an Alternative Method for Studying the Role of H-Consuming Bacteria in the Anaerobic Oxidation of Iron." In: Dexter SC (ed) Proceedings of the International Conference on Biologically Induced Corrosion. National Association of Corrosion Engineers, Houston, Texas, 8:309–320

D. Weismann, M. Lohse (Hrsg.): "Sulfid-Praxishandbuch der Abwassertechnik; Geruch, Gefahr, Korrosion verhindern und Kosten beherrschen!" 1. Auflage, VULKAN-Verlag, 2007, – German.

Mansouri, Hamidreza, Seyed Abolhasan Alavi, and Meysam Fotovat. "Microbial-Influenced Corrosion of Corten Steel Compared with Carbon Steel and Stainless Steel in Oily Wastewater by Pseudomonas aeruginosa." JOM: 1–7.

J. F. Parisot (editor), "Corrosion and alteration of nuclear materials", CEA Saclay, Paris, 2010, p 147-150


</doc>
<doc id="1270878" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1270878" title="Acid-fastness">
Acid-fastness

Acid-fastness is a physical property of certain bacterial and eukaryotic cells, as well as some sub-cellular structures, specifically their resistance to decolorization by acids during laboratory staining procedures. Once stained as part of a sample, these organisms can resist the acid and/or ethanol-based decolorization procedures common in many staining protocols, hence the name "acid-fast".

The mechanisms of acid-fastness vary by species, although the most well-known example is in the genus "Mycobacterium", which includes the species responsible for tuberculosis and leprosy. The acid-fastness of "Mycobacteria" is due to the high mycolic acid content of their cell walls, which is responsible for the staining pattern of poor absorption followed by high retention. Some bacteria may also be partially acid-fast, such as "Nocardia".

Acid-fast organisms are difficult to characterize using standard microbiological techniques, though they can be stained using concentrated dyes, particularly when the staining process is combined with heat. Some, such as "Mycobacteria", can be stained with the Gram stain, but they do not take the crystal violet well and thus appear light purple, which can still potentially result in an incorrect gram positive identification.

The most common staining technique used to identify acid-fast bacteria is the Ziehl-Neelsen stain, in which the acid-fast species are stained bright red and stand out clearly against a blue background. Another method is the Kinyoun method, in which the bacteria are stained bright red and stand out clearly against a green background. Acid-fast "Mycobacteria" can also be visualized by fluorescence microscopy using specific fluorescent dyes (auramine-rhodamine stain, for example). The eggs of the parasitic lung fluke "Paragonimus westermani" are actually destroyed by the stain, which can hinder diagnosis in patients who present with TB-like symptoms.


Very few structures are acid-fast; this makes staining for acid-fastness particularly useful in diagnosis. The following are notable examples of structures which are acid-fast or modified acid-fast:



</doc>
<doc id="17630584" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=17630584" title="Analytical profile index">
Analytical profile index

The analytical profile index or API is a classification of bacteria based on experiments, allowing fast identification. This system is developed for quick identification of clinically relevant bacteria. Because of this, only known bacteria can be identified.

It was invented in the 1970s in the United States by Pierre Janin of Analytab Products, Inc. Presently, the API test system is manufactured by bioMérieux. The API range introduced a standardized, miniaturized version of existing techniques, which up until then were complicated to perform and difficult to read.

The API 20E/NE fast identification system combines some conventional tests and allows the identification of a limited number of Gram-negative Enterobacteriaceae or non-Enterobacteriaceae. The test systems are stored in 20 small reaction tubes, which include the substrates. An identification is only possible with microbiological culture. 
To guarantee a comparability of different samples, follow the instructions of the manufacturer.

Before starting a test, one must confirm the culture is of an Enterobacteriaceae. To test this, a quick oxidase test for cytochrome c oxidase is performed. Enterobacteriaceae are typically oxidase negative, meaning they either do not use oxygen as an electron acceptor in the electron transport chain, or they use a different cytochrome enzyme for transferring electrons to oxygen. If the culture is determined to be oxidase positive, alternative tests must be carried out to correctly identify the bacterial species.

API stands for Analytical Profile Index and is a commercial system to identify different bacteria. One of the API systems is specific for differentiating between members of the Gram negative bacterial Family Enterobacteriaceae and is called API-20E. The other API system is specific for Gram positive bacteria, including Staphylococcus species, Micrococcus, species, and related organisms, and is called API-Staph.

API test strips consists of wells containing dehydrated substrates to detect enzymatic activity, usually related to fermentation of carbohydrate or catabolism of proteins or amino acids by the inoculated organisms. A bacterial suspension is used to rehydrate each of the wells and the strips are incubated. During incubation, metabolism produces color changes that are either spontaneous or revealed by the addition of reagents. For example, when carbohydrates are fermented, the pH within the well decreases and that change is indicated by a change in the color of the pH indicator. All positive and negative test results are compiled to obtain a profile number, which is then compared with profile numbers in a commercial codebook (or online) to determine the identification of the bacterial species.



</doc>
<doc id="31574036" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31574036" title="Pseudomonas genome database">
Pseudomonas genome database

The Pseudomonas Genome Database is a database of genomic annotations for the pseudomonas genomes.




</doc>
<doc id="24078186" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=24078186" title="White pox disease">
White pox disease

White pox disease (also "acroporid serratiosis" and "patchy necrosis"), first noted in 1996 on coral reefs near the Florida keys, is a coral disease affecting Elkhorn coral ("Acropora palmata") throughout the Caribbean. It causes irregular white patches or blotches on the coral that result from the loss of coral tissue. These patches distinguish white pox disease from white band disease which produces a distinctive white band where the coral skeleton has been denuded. The blotches caused by this disease are also clearly differentiated from 
coral bleaching and scars caused by coral-eating snails. It is very contagious, spreading to nearby coral.

At the locations where white pox disease has been observed, it is estimated to have reduced the living tissue in elkhorn corals by 50–80%. In the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary (FKNMS), the losses of living coral are estimated to average around 88%. Elkhorn coral was formerly the dominant shallow water reef-building coral throughout the Caribbean but now is listed as a threatened species, due in part to the disease. Elkhorn coral is the first species of coral to be listed as threatened in the United States.

The pathogen responsible is believed to be "Serratia marcescens", a common intestinal bacterium found in humans and other animals. This is the first time it has been linked to the death of coral. The specific source of the bacteria that is killing the coral is currently unknown. As well as being a part of human and animal gut flora, "S. marcescens" can live in soil and water as a "free living" microbe.
Research is needed to find and confirm the exact source(s) of the pathogen, possible sources include sewage treatment plant effluent, marine fish feces and seabird
guano.



</doc>
<doc id="15988191" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15988191" title="Phototrophic biofilm">
Phototrophic biofilm

Phototrophic biofilms occur on contact surfaces in a range of terrestrial and aquatic environments. Phototrophic biofilms can best be described as surface attached microbial communities (see also Biofilm and Chemistry of Biofilm Prevention) mainly driven by light as the energy source with phototrophic organisms clearly present. Eukaryotic algae and cyanobacteria generate energy and reduce carbon dioxide, providing organic substrates and oxygen. The photosynthetic activity fuels processes and conversions in the total biofilm community, including the heterotrophic fraction.

Thick laminated multilayered phototrophic biofilms are usually referred to as microbial mats or phototrophic mats (see also biofilm). Phototrophic biofilms and microbial mats have been described in extreme environments like thermal springs, hyper saline ponds, desert soil crusts, and in lake ice covers in Antarctica. The 3.4-billion-year fossil record of benthic phototrophic communities, such as microbial mats and stromatolites, indicates that these associations represent the Earth's oldest known ecosystems. It is thought that these early ecosystems played a key role in the build-up of oxygen in the Earth’s atmosphere.

There is a growing interest in the application of phototrophic biofilms, for instance in wastewater treatment in constructed wetlands, bioremediation, aquaculture, and biohydrogen production.


</doc>
<doc id="15397737" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=15397737" title="Phase variation">
Phase variation

In biology, phase variation is a method for dealing with rapidly varying environments without requiring random mutation. It involves the variation of protein expression, frequently in an on-off fashion, within different parts of a bacterial population. As such the phenotype can switch at frequencies that are much higher (sometimes >1%) than classical mutation rates. Phase variation contributes to virulence by generating heterogeneity. Although it has been most commonly studied in the context of immune evasion, it is observed in many other areas as well and is employed by various types of bacteria, including "Salmonella" species.

"Salmonella" use this technique to switch between different types of the protein flagellin. As a result, flagella with different structures are assembled. Once an adaptive response has been mounted against one type of flagellin, or if a previous encounter has left the adaptive immune system ready to deal with one type of flagellin, switching types renders previously high affinity antibodies, TCRs, and BCRs ineffective against the flagella.

Site-specific recombinations are usually short and occur at a single target site within the recombining sequence. For this to occur there are typically one or more cofactors (to name a few: DNA-binding proteins and the presence or absence of DNA binding sites) and a site-specific recombinase. There is a change in orientation of the DNA that will affect gene expression or the structure of the gene product. This is done by changing the spatial arrangement of the promoter or the regulatory elements.

Through the utilization of specific recombinases, a particular DNA sequence is inverted, resulting in an ON to OFF switch and vice versa of the gene located within or next to this switch. Many bacterial species can utilize inversion to change the expression of certain genes for the benefit of the bacterium during infection. The inversion event can be simple by involving the toggle in expression of one gene, like "E. coli" pilin expression, or more complicated by involving multiple genes in the expression of multiple types of flagellin by "S. typhimurium". Fimbrial adhesion by the type I fimbriae in "E. coli" undergoes site specific inversion to regulate the expression of "fimA", the major subunit of the pili, depending on the stage of infection. The invertible element has a promoter within it that depending on the orientation will turn on or off the transcription of "fimA". The inversion is mediated by two recombinases, FimB and FimE, and regulatory proteins H-NS, Integration Host Factor (IHF) and Leucine responsive protein (LRP). The FimE recombinase has the capability to only invert the element and turn expression from on to off while FimB can mediate the inversion in both directions.

If excision is precise and the original sequence of DNA is restored, reversible phase variation can be mediated by transposition. Phase variation mediated by transposition targets specific DNA sequences. "P. atlantica" contains an "eps" locus that encodes extracellular polysaccharide and the ON or OFF expression of this locus is controlled by the presence or absence of IS492. Two recombinases encoded by "MooV" and "Piv" mediate the precise excision and insertion, respectively, of the insertion element IS492 in the "eps" locus. When IS492 is excised it becomes a circular extrachromosomal element that results in the restored expression of "eps".
Another, more complex example of site specific DNA rearrangement is used in the flagella of Salmonella typhimurium. In the usual phase, a promoter sequence promotes the expression of the H2 flagella gene along with a repressor of H1 flagella gene. Once this promoter sequence is inverted by the hin gene the repressor is turned off as is H2 allowing H1 to be expressed.

Gene conversion is another example of a type of phase variation. Type IV pili of Neisseria gonorrhoeae are controlled in this way. There are several copies of the gene coding for these pili (the Pil gene) but only one is expressed at any given time. This is referred to as the PilE gene. The silent versions of this gene, PilS, can use homologous recombination to combine with parts of the PilE gene and thus create a different phenotype. This allows for up to 10,000,000 different phenotypes of the pili.

Unlike other mechanisms of phase variation, epigenetic modifications do not alter DNA sequence and therefore it is the phenotype that is altered not the genotype. The integrity of the genome is intact and the change incurred by methylation alters the binding of transcription factors. The outcome is the regulation of transcription resulting in switches in gene expression. An outer membrane protein Antigen 43 (Ag43) in "E. coli" is controlled by phase variation mediated by two proteins, DNA-methylating enzyme deoxyadenosine methyltransferase (Dam) and the oxidative stress regulator OxyR. Ag43, located on the cell surface, is encoded by the "Agn43" gene (previously designated as "flu") and is important for biofilms and infection. The expression of "Agn43" is dependent on the binding of the regulator protein OxyR. When OxyR is bound to the regulatory region of "Agn43", which overlaps with the promoter, it inhibits transcription. The ON phase of transcription is dependent upon Dam methylating the GATC sequences in the beginning of the "Agn43" gene (which happens to overlap with the OxyR binding site). When the Dam methylates the GATC sites it inhibits the OxyR from binding, allowing transcription of Ag43.

In this form of phase variation. The promoter region of the genome can move from one copy of a gene to another through homologous recombination. This occurs with Campylobacter fetus surface proteins. The several different surface antigen proteins are all silent apart from one and all share a conserved region at the 5' end. The promoter sequence can then move between these conserved regions and allow expression of a different gene.

Slipped strand mispairing (SSM) is a process that produces mispairing of short repeat sequences between the mother and daughter strand during DNA synthesis. This RecA-independent mechanism can transpire during either DNA replication or DNA repair and can be on the leading or lagging strand. SSM can result in an increase or decrease in the number of short repeat sequences. The short repeat sequences are 1 to 7 nucleotides and can be homogeneous or heterogeneous repetitive DNA sequences. Altered gene expression is a result of SSM and depending where the increase or decrease of the short repeat sequences occurs in relation to the promoter will either regulate at the level of transcription or translation. The outcome is an ON or OFF phase of a gene or genes.

Transcriptional regulation (bottom portion of figure) occurs in several ways. One possible way is if the repeats are located in the promoter region at the RNA polymerase binding site, -10 and -35 upstream of the gene(s). The opportunistic pathogen "H. influenzae" has two divergently oriented promoters and fimbriae genes "hifA" and "hifB". The overlapping promoter regions have repeats of the dinucleotide TA in the -10 and -35 sequences. Through SSM the TA repeat region can undergo addition or subtraction of TA dinucleotides which results in the reversible ON phase or OFF phase of transcription of the "hifA" and "hifB". The second way that SSM induces transcriptional regulation is by changing the short repeat sequences located outside the promoter. If there is a change in the short repeat sequence it can affect the binding of a regulatory protein, such as an activator or repressor. It can also lead to differences in post-transcriptional stability of mRNA.

Translation of a protein can be regulated by SSM if the short repeat sequences are in the coding region of the gene (top portion of the figure). Changing the number of repeats in the open reading frame can affect the codon sequence by adding a premature stop codon or by changing the sequence of the protein. This often results in a truncated (in the case of a premature stop codon) and/or nonfunctional protein.


</doc>
<doc id="32286355" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=32286355" title="Fibrolytic bacterium">
Fibrolytic bacterium

"Not to be confused with fibrinolytic via fibrinolysis or the breakdown of fibrin."

Fibrolytic Bacteria constitute a group of microorganisms that are able to process complex plant polysaccharides thanks to their capacity to synthesize cellulolytic and hemicellulolytic enzymes. Polysaccharides are present in plant cellular cell walls in a compact fiber form where they are mainly composed of cellulose and hemicellulose.

Fibrolytic enzymes, which are classified as cellulases, can hydrolyze the β (1 ->4) bonds in plant polysaccharides. Cellulase and hemicellulase (also known as xylanase) are the two main representatives of these enzymes.

Fibrolytic bacteria use glycolysis and the pentose phosphate pathway as the main metabolic routes to catabolize carbohydrates in order to obtain energy and carbon backbones. They use ammonia as the major and practically exclusive source of nitrogen, and they require several B-vitamins for their development.
They often depend on other microorganisms to obtain some of their nutrients. Although their growth rate is considered slow, it can be enhanced in the presence of considerable amounts of short-chain fatty acids (isobutyric and isovaleric). These compounds are normally generated as a product of the amino acid fermentative activity of other microorganisms.
Because of their habitat conditions, most fibrolytic bacteria are anaerobic.

Most fibrolytic bacteria are classified as Bacteroidetes or Firmicutes and include several bacterial species with diverse morphological and physiological characteristics.
They are normally commensal species which have a symbiotic relationship with different insect and mammal species, constituting one of the main components of their gastrointestinal flora. In fact, in herbivores each milliliter of ruminal content can reach about 50 million of bacteria of a great variety of genera and species. .

Given the importance of industrial processing of plant fibers in different fields, the genomic analysis of fibrolytic communities in the gastrointestinal tract of different animals, may provide new biotechnological tools for the transformation of complex polysaccharides (including lignocellulytic biomass) .

So far, most applications are performed using enzymatic aqueous solutions containing one or more types of cellulases. Enzyme production for industrial use has its origins at the end of the nineteenth century in Denmark and Japan. An enzyme is a cellular product which can be obtained from animal and vegetable tissues, or through the biological activity of selected microorganisms. Enzymes are then used in different industrial processes.
In order to produce enzymatic solutions for industrial applications, it is first necessary to obtain them in huge amounts and then, purify them to a certain extent; this makes the production process long and expensive. One possible alternative would be working with microbial communities, which makes the process shorter, and cheaper. However, process control is much more difficult when working with bacterial communities than when applying enzymatic solutions.

In the early 1980s, enzymes produced by fibrolytic bacteria were incorporated in cattle food. This allowed them to obtain more energy from the forage which they fed on, thanks to the partial digestion of lignocellulosic material.
They have been gaining importance in the food processing industry, in the filtration of fruit and vegetables juices, in edible oil extraction, in baking, etc. Furthermore, the use of these kinds of enzymes was progressively extended to the textile and laundry industry, where they are used to fade the intense blue of fabrics and to provide them a more faded appearance.
In the chemical industry, these enzymes have allowed the development of new detergents and washing-up liquids; in the paper industry they play a very important role in bleaching processes, minimizing toxicity and being more economic; and in biotechnological research, the use of the cellulose binding domains from fibrolytic enzymes has allowed the purification of recombinant proteins.

Fibrolytic bacteria are expected to play an important role in renewable energy production through biomass degradation.
One of the main objectives of biotechnology is biofuel production with the aim to reduce CO2 emissions, because biofuels obtained from plant material does not contribute a net atmospheric input of CO2. The gas emitted during the combustion of biofuels of cellulolytic origin will be reabsorbed in vegetable growth and this is why it does not have an environmental impact so negative.

Probably, the best studied fibrolytic community is the one in the rumen of ruminants. However, there are other organisms that are able to degrade vegetable fibres, from insects to mollusks, all of them can do it thanks to the activity of different microbial symbionts.
In order to improve the industrial transformation processes of vegetable fibres and related applications it is necessary to discover new and efficient enzymes and specialized bacterial communities.
Next we describe the main steps in the discovery of genes and genomes from fibrolytic bacteria .
The first step that can be followed to obtain fibrolytic bacteria from gastrointestinal cavities in ruminants is the culture of the target communities inside the rumen of a cow by introducing a nylon bag containing a forage with a high cellulose content (for example, Panicum virgatum).

An orifice is surgically done to the spine making rumen available from the outside through a tampon which avoids the closing of the fistula. The nylon bag is incubated in the rumen 72 hours.
After incubation it is important to separate the microorganisms adhered to the vegetable fibres from the ones that are in suspension in the ruminal fluid.

To analyze the specificity of the community on the sample, one can compare the diversity of sequences of small subunit ribosomal RNA of the sample with a sample of reference.
After extraction and purification of the DNA of the sample, the PCR emulsion technique is used to amplify the genes of the small ribosomal subunit. Then each amplicon is sequenced with the pyrosequencing technique. Once we have the sequences they have to be compared and grouped according to the degree of similarity, to define OTUS (Operational Taxonomic Units)-which are groups of sequences that belong to organisms phylogenetically close.
Comparing OTUS of the two samples the differences of both microbial communities could be assessed.

In order to obtain the sequences of lignocelulitic genes an accurate metagenomic analysis is done. Sequencing and assembly of the whole DNA of the sample gives the metagenome of the sample.

The identification of genes that encode for proteins which have fibrolytic activity is done in two steps.
First, a bioinformatic analysis is performed. The sequences obtained in the metagenomic analysis are compared with the gene sequences of known fibrolytic proteins (for example the sequences that are on the data base Carbohidrate Active Enzymes (CAZy)).
In this first step the number of candidate genes is reduced considerably and these are the ones that are used on the following step.
In the second step, a library for protein expression is built. Expression vectors are introduced in E.coli and after the growth of these bacteria the supernatant is tested for biochemical activity on different substrates.

To identify to which microorganisms belong the enzymes which have been identified, and check if metagenome assembly was right, a separation of different species of bacteria from the sample can be done by flow cytometry.
The use of specific antibodies labelled with fluorochromes makes possible to separate the different cell types of the sample which belong to different phylogenetic groups. This technique is called Fluorescence Activated Cell Sorting (FACS).
Once the different species of bacteria are separated, their genomes are sequenced and the validation of the metagenomic analysis can be done.


References

T. Ponce Noyola, O. Pérez Avalos. Celulasas y xilanasas en la industria.a Departamento de Biotecnología y Bioingeniería del Cinvestav

R. L. Baldwin, M. J. Allison. Rumen Metabolism. Journal of Animal Science 1983. 57:461-477

Mundo Ganadero. El mensual Mundo Ganadero lo edita Eumedia, S.A. en Madrid. C/ Claudio Coello, 16. 28001 MADRID

“Polysaccharide utilization by gut bacteria: potential for new insights from genomic analysis” Harry J. Flint, Edward A. Bayer, Marco T. Rincon, Raphael Lamed and Bryan A. White. Publicat a la revista Nature el Febrer de 2008


</doc>
<doc id="1057083" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1057083" title="Microbial ecology">
Microbial ecology

Microbial ecology (or environmental microbiology) is the ecology of microorganisms: their relationship with one another and with their environment. It concerns the three major domains of life—Eukaryota, Archaea, and Bacteria—as well as viruses.

Microorganisms, by their omnipresence, impact the entire biosphere. Microbial life plays a primary role in regulating biogeochemical systems in virtually all of our planet's environments, including some of the most extreme, from frozen environments and acidic lakes, to hydrothermal vents at the bottom of deepest oceans, and some of the most familiar, such as the human small intestine. As a consequence of the quantitative magnitude of microbial life (calculated as cells; eight orders of magnitude greater than the number of stars in the observable universe) microbes, by virtue of their biomass alone, constitute a significant carbon sink. Aside from carbon fixation, microorganisms' key collective metabolic processes (including nitrogen fixation, methane metabolism, and sulfur metabolism) control global biogeochemical cycling. The immensity of microorganisms' production is such that, even in the total absence of eukaryotic life, these processes would likely continue unchanged.

While microbes have been studied since the seventeenth-century, this research was from a primarily physiological perspective rather than an ecological one. For instance, Louis Pasteur and his disciples were interested in the problem of microbial distribution both on land and in the ocean. Martinus Beijerinck invented the enrichment culture, a fundamental method of studying microbes from the environment. He is often incorrectly credited with framing the microbial biogeographic idea that "everything is everywhere, but, the environment selects", which was stated by Lourens Baas Becking. Sergei Winogradsky was one of the first researchers to attempt to understand microorganisms outside of the medical context—making him among the first students of microbial ecology and environmental microbiology—discovering chemosynthesis, and developing the Winogradsky column in the process.

Beijerinck and Windogradsky, however, were focused on the physiology of microorganisms, not the microbial habitat or their ecological interactions. Modern microbial ecology was launched by Robert Hungate and coworkers, who investigated the rumen ecosystem. The study of the rumen required Hungate to develop techniques for culturing anaerobic microbes, and he also pioneered a quantitative approach to the study of microbes and their ecological activities that differentiated the relative contributions of species and catabolic pathways.

Microorganisms are the backbone of all ecosystems, but even more so in the zones where photosynthesis is unable to take place because of the absence of light. In such zones, chemosynthetic microbes provide energy and carbon to the other organisms. These chemotrophic organisms can also function in environments lacking oxygen by using other electron acceptors for their respiration.

Other microbes are decomposers, with the ability to recycle nutrients from other organisms' waste products. These microbes play a vital role in biogeochemical cycles. The nitrogen cycle, the phosphorus cycle, the sulphur cycle and the carbon cycle all depend on microorganisms in one way or another. For example, the nitrogen gas which makes up 78% of the earth's atmosphere is unavailable to most organisms, until it is converted to a biologically available form by the microbial process of nitrogen fixation.

Due to the high level of horizontal gene transfer among microbial communities, microbial ecology is also of importance to studies of evolution.

Microbes, especially bacteria, often engage in symbiotic relationships (either positive or negative) with other microorganisms or larger organisms. Although physically small, symbiotic relationships amongst microbes are significant in eukaryotic processes and their evolution. The types of symbiotic relationship that microbes participate in include mutualism, commensalism, parasitism, and amensalism, and these relationships affect the ecosystem in many ways. 

Mutualism in microbial ecology is a relationship between microbial species and between microbial species and humans that allow for both sides to benefit. One such example would be syntrophy, also known as cross-feeding, of which "'Methanobacterium omelianskii" ' is a classical example. This consortium is formed by an ethanol fermenting organism and a methanogen. The ethanol-fermenting organism provides the archaeal partner with the H, which this methanogen needs in order to grow and produce methane. Syntrophy has been hypothesized to play a significant role in energy- and nutrient-limited environments, such as deep subsurface, where it can help the microbial community with diverse functional properties to survive, grow and produce maximum amount of energy. Anaerobic oxidation of methane (AOM) is carried out by mutualistic consortium of a sulfate-reducing bacterium and an anaerobic methane-oxidizing archaeon. The reaction used by the bacterial partner for the production of H is endergonic (and so thermodynamically unfavored) however, when coupled to the reaction used by archaeal partner, the overall reaction becomes exergonic.  Thus the two organisms are in a mutualistic relationship which allows them to grow and thrive in an environment, deadly for either species alone. Lichen is an example of a symbiotic organism.

Commensalism is very common in microbial world, literally meaning "eating from the same table". Metabolic products of one microbial population are used by another microbial population without either gain or harm for the first population. There are many "pairs "of microbial species that perform either oxidation or reduction reaction to the same chemical equation. For example, methanogens produce methane by reducing CO to CH, while methanotrophs oxidize methane back to CO. 

Amensalism (also commonly known as antagonism) is a type of symbiotic relationship where one species/organism is harmed while the other remains unaffected. One example of such a relationship that takes place in microbial ecology is between the microbial species "Lactobacillus casei" and "Pseudomonas taetrolens". When co-existing in an environment, "Pseudomonas taetrolens" shows inhibited growth and decreased production of lactobionic acid (its main product) most likely due to the byproducts created by "Lactobacillus casei" during its production of lactic acid. However, "Lactobacillus casei" shows no difference in its behaviour, and such this relationship can be defined as amensalism.

Biotechnology may be used alongside microbial ecology to address a number of environmental and economic challenges. For example, molecular techniques such as community fingerprinting or metagenomics can be used to track changes in microbial communities over time or assess their biodiversity. Managing the carbon cycle to sequester carbon dioxide and prevent excess methanogenesis is important in mitigating global warming, and the prospects of bioenergy are being expanded by the development of microbial fuel cells. Microbial resource management advocates a more progressive attitude towards disease, whereby biological control agents are favoured over attempts at eradication. Fluxes in microbial communities has to be better characterized for this field's potential to be realised. In addition, there are also clinical implications, as marine microbial symbioses are a valuable source of existing and novel antimicrobial agents, and thus offer another line of inquiry in the evolutionary arms race of antibiotic resistance, a pressing concern for researchers.

Microbes exist in all areas, including homes, offices, commercial centers, and hospitals. In 2016, the journal "Microbiome" published a collection of various works studying the microbial ecology of the built environment.

A 2006 study of pathogenic bacteria in hospitals found that their ability to survive varied by the type, with some surviving for only a few days while others survived for months.

The lifespan of microbes in the home varies similarly. Generally bacteria and viruses require a wet environment with a humidity of over 10 percent. "E. coli" can survive for a few hours to a day. Bacteria which form spores can survive longer, with "Staphylococcus aureus" surviving potentially for weeks or, in the case of "Bacillus anthracis", years.

In the home, pets can be carriers of bacteria; for example, reptiles are commonly carriers of salmonella.

"S. aureus" is particularly common, and asymptomatically colonizes about 30% of the human population; attempts to decolonize carriers have met with limited success and generally involve mupirocin nasally and chlorhexidine washing, potentially along with vancomycin and cotrimoxazole to address intestinal and urinary tract infections.

Some metals, particularly copper and silver, have antimicrobial properties. Using antimicrobial copper-alloy touch surfaces is a technique which has begun to be used in the 21st century to prevent transmission of bacteria. Silver nanoparticles have also begun to be incorporated into building surfaces and fabrics, although concerns have been raised about the potential side-effects of the tiny particles on human health.



</doc>
<doc id="34344022" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=34344022" title="Consorms">
Consorms

A bacterial consorm or bacterial community is a group of different types of bacterial strains which cluster in a place, they shared might common food and help each other for defence by doing horizontal gene transfer - within a biomass - that summatively act as a unit, with each type of bacteria contributing to the function of the consorm (community).

This is a rarely used term that is mostly synonymous to consortium.



</doc>
<doc id="9028799" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9028799" title="Bacteria">
Bacteria

Bacteria (; common noun bacteria, singular bacterium) are a type of biological cell. They constitute a large domain of prokaryotic microorganisms. Typically a few micrometres in length, bacteria have a number of shapes, ranging from spheres to rods and spirals. Bacteria were among the first life forms to appear on Earth, and are present in most of its habitats. Bacteria inhabit soil, water, acidic hot springs, radioactive waste, and the deep biosphere of the earth's crust. Bacteria also live in symbiotic and parasitic relationships with plants and animals. Most bacteria have not been characterised, and only about 27 percent of the bacterial phyla have species that can be grown in the laboratory. The study of bacteria is known as bacteriology, a branch of microbiology.

Nearly all animal life is dependent on bacteria for survival as only bacteria and some archaea possess the genes and enzymes necessary to synthesize vitamin B, also known as cobalamin, and provide it through the food chain. Vitamin B is a water-soluble vitamin that is involved in the metabolism of every cell of the human body. It is a cofactor in DNA synthesis, and in both fatty acid and amino acid metabolism. It is particularly important in the normal functioning of the nervous system via its role in the synthesis of myelin.

There are typically 40 million bacterial cells in a gram of soil and a million bacterial cells in a millilitre of fresh water. There are approximately 5×10 bacteria on Earth, forming a biomass which exceeds that of all plants and animals. Bacteria are vital in many stages of the nutrient cycle by recycling nutrients such as the fixation of nitrogen from the atmosphere. The nutrient cycle includes the decomposition of dead bodies; bacteria are responsible for the putrefaction stage in this process. In the biological communities surrounding hydrothermal vents and cold seeps, extremophile bacteria provide the nutrients needed to sustain life by converting dissolved compounds, such as hydrogen sulphide and methane, to energy. 

In humans and most animals the largest number of bacteria exist in the gut, and a large number on the skin. The vast majority of the bacteria in the body are rendered harmless by the protective effects of the immune system, though many are beneficial, particularly in the gut flora. However, several species of bacteria are pathogenic and cause infectious diseases, including cholera, syphilis, anthrax, leprosy, and bubonic plague. The most common fatal bacterial diseases are respiratory infections. Tuberculosis alone kills about 2 million people per year, mostly in sub-Saharan Africa. Antibiotics are used to treat bacterial infections and are also used in farming, making antibiotic resistance a growing problem. In industry, bacteria are important in sewage treatment and the breakdown of oil spills, the production of cheese and yogurt through fermentation, the recovery of gold, palladium, copper and other metals in the mining sector, as well as in biotechnology, and the manufacture of antibiotics and other chemicals.

Once regarded as plants constituting the class "Schizomycetes" ("fission fungi"), bacteria are now classified as prokaryotes. Unlike cells of animals and other eukaryotes, bacterial cells do not contain a nucleus and rarely harbour membrane-bound organelles. Although the term "bacteria" traditionally included all prokaryotes, the scientific classification changed after the discovery in the 1990s that prokaryotes consist of two very different groups of organisms that evolved from an ancient common ancestor. These evolutionary domains are called "Bacteria" and "Archaea".

The word "bacteria" is the plural of the New Latin "", which is the latinisation of the Greek ("bakterion"), the diminutive of βακτηρία ("bakteria"), meaning "staff, cane", because the first ones to be discovered were rod-shaped.

The ancestors of modern bacteria were unicellular microorganisms that were the first forms of life to appear on Earth, about 4 billion years ago. For about 3 billion years, most organisms were microscopic, and bacteria and archaea were the dominant forms of life. Although bacterial fossils exist, such as stromatolites, their lack of distinctive morphology prevents them from being used to examine the history of bacterial evolution, or to date the time of origin of a particular bacterial species. However, gene sequences can be used to reconstruct the bacterial phylogeny, and these studies indicate that bacteria diverged first from the archaeal/eukaryotic lineage. The most recent common ancestor of bacteria and archaea was probably a hyperthermophile that lived about 2.5 billion–3.2 billion years ago. The earliest life on land may have been bacteria some 3.22 billion years ago.

Bacteria were also involved in the second great evolutionary divergence, that of the archaea and eukaryotes. Here, eukaryotes resulted from the entering of ancient bacteria into endosymbiotic associations with the ancestors of eukaryotic cells, which were themselves possibly related to the Archaea. This involved the engulfment by proto-eukaryotic cells of alphaproteobacterial symbionts to form either mitochondria or hydrogenosomes, which are still found in all known Eukarya (sometimes in highly reduced form, e.g. in ancient "amitochondrial" protozoa). Later, some eukaryotes that already contained mitochondria also engulfed cyanobacteria-like organisms, leading to the formation of chloroplasts in algae and plants. This is known as primary endosymbiosis.

Bacteria display a wide diversity of shapes and sizes, called morphologies. Bacterial cells are about one-tenth the size of eukaryotic cells and are typically 0.5–5.0 micrometres in length. However, a few species are visible to the unaided eye—for example, "Thiomargarita namibiensis" is up to half a millimetre long and "Epulopiscium fishelsoni" reaches 0.7 mm. Among the smallest bacteria are members of the genus "Mycoplasma", which measure only 0.3 micrometres, as small as the largest viruses. Some bacteria may be even smaller, but these ultramicrobacteria are not well-studied.

Most bacterial species are either spherical, called "cocci" ("sing". coccus, from Greek "kókkos", grain, seed), or rod-shaped, called "bacilli" ("sing". bacillus, from Latin "baculus", stick). Some bacteria, called "vibrio", are shaped like slightly curved rods or comma-shaped; others can be spiral-shaped, called "spirilla", or tightly coiled, called "spirochaetes". A small number of other unusual shapes have been described, such as star-shaped bacteria. This wide variety of shapes is determined by the bacterial cell wall and cytoskeleton, and is important because it can influence the ability of bacteria to acquire nutrients, attach to surfaces, swim through liquids and escape predators.
Many bacterial species exist simply as single cells, others associate in characteristic patterns: "Neisseria" form diploids (pairs), "Streptococcus" form chains, and "Staphylococcus" group together in "bunch of grapes" clusters. Bacteria can also group to form larger multicellular structures, such as the elongated filaments of "Actinobacteria", the aggregates of "Myxobacteria", and the complex hyphae of "Streptomyces". These multicellular structures are often only seen in certain conditions. For example, when starved of amino acids, Myxobacteria detect surrounding cells in a process known as quorum sensing, migrate towards each other, and aggregate to form fruiting bodies up to 500 micrometres long and containing approximately 100,000 bacterial cells. In these fruiting bodies, the bacteria perform separate tasks; for example, about one in ten cells migrate to the top of a fruiting body and differentiate into a specialised dormant state called a myxospore, which is more resistant to drying and other adverse environmental conditions.

Bacteria often attach to surfaces and form dense aggregations called biofilms, and larger formations known as microbial mats. These biofilms and mats can range from a few micrometres in thickness to up to half a metre in depth, and may contain multiple species of bacteria, protists and archaea. Bacteria living in biofilms display a complex arrangement of cells and extracellular components, forming secondary structures, such as microcolonies, through which there are networks of channels to enable better diffusion of nutrients. In natural environments, such as soil or the surfaces of plants, the majority of bacteria are bound to surfaces in biofilms. Biofilms are also important in medicine, as these structures are often present during chronic bacterial infections or in infections of implanted medical devices, and bacteria protected within biofilms are much harder to kill than individual isolated bacteria.

The bacterial cell is surrounded by a cell membrane, which is made primarily of phospholipids. This membrane encloses the contents of the cell and acts as a barrier to hold nutrients, proteins and other essential components of the cytoplasm within the cell. Unlike eukaryotic cells, bacteria usually lack large membrane-bound structures in their cytoplasm such as a nucleus, mitochondria, chloroplasts and the other organelles present in eukaryotic cells. However, some bacteria have protein-bound organelles in the cytoplasm which compartmentalize aspects of bacterial metabolism, such as the carboxysome. Additionally, bacteria have a multi-component cytoskeleton to control the localisation of proteins and nucleic acids within the cell, and to manage the process of cell division.

Many important biochemical reactions, such as energy generation, occur due to concentration gradients across membranes, creating a potential difference analogous to a battery. The general lack of internal membranes in bacteria means these reactions, such as electron transport, occur across the cell membrane between the cytoplasm and the outside of the cell or periplasm. However, in many photosynthetic bacteria the plasma membrane is highly folded and fills most of the cell with layers of light-gathering membrane. These light-gathering complexes may even form lipid-enclosed structures called chlorosomes in green sulfur bacteria.
Bacteria do not have a membrane-bound nucleus, and their genetic material is typically a single circular bacterial chromosome of DNA located in the cytoplasm in an irregularly shaped body called the nucleoid. The nucleoid contains the chromosome with its associated proteins and RNA. Like all other organisms, bacteria contain ribosomes for the production of proteins, but the structure of the bacterial ribosome is different from that of eukaryotes and Archaea.

Some bacteria produce intracellular nutrient storage granules, such as glycogen, polyphosphate, sulfur or polyhydroxyalkanoates. Bacteria such as the photosynthetic cyanobacteria, produce internal gas vacuoles, which they use to regulate their buoyancy, allowing them to move up or down into water layers with different light intensities and nutrient levels.

Around the outside of the cell membrane is the cell wall. Bacterial cell walls are made of peptidoglycan (also called murein), which is made from polysaccharide chains cross-linked by peptides containing D-amino acids. Bacterial cell walls are different from the cell walls of plants and fungi, which are made of cellulose and chitin, respectively. The cell wall of bacteria is also distinct from that of Archaea, which do not contain peptidoglycan. The cell wall is essential to the survival of many bacteria, and the antibiotic penicillin ( produced by a fungus called "Penicillium") is able to kill bacteria by inhibiting a step in the synthesis of peptidoglycan.

There are broadly speaking two different types of cell wall in bacteria, that classify bacteria into Gram-positive bacteria and Gram-negative bacteria. The names originate from the reaction of cells to the Gram stain, a long-standing test for the classification of bacterial species.

Gram-positive bacteria possess a thick cell wall containing many layers of peptidoglycan and teichoic acids. In contrast, Gram-negative bacteria have a relatively thin cell wall consisting of a few layers of peptidoglycan surrounded by a second lipid membrane containing lipopolysaccharides and lipoproteins. Most bacteria have the Gram-negative cell wall, and only the Firmicutes and Actinobacteria (previously known as the low G+C and high G+C Gram-positive bacteria, respectively) have the alternative Gram-positive arrangement. These differences in structure can produce differences in antibiotic susceptibility; for instance, vancomycin can kill only Gram-positive bacteria and is ineffective against Gram-negative pathogens, such as "Haemophilus influenzae" or "Pseudomonas aeruginosa". Some bacteria have cell wall structures that are neither classically Gram-positive or Gram-negative. This includes clinically important bacteria such as "Mycobacteria" which have a thick peptidoglycan cell wall like a Gram-positive bacterium, but also a second outer layer of lipids.

In many bacteria, an S-layer of rigidly arrayed protein molecules covers the outside of the cell. This layer provides chemical and physical protection for the cell surface and can act as a macromolecular diffusion barrier. S-layers have diverse but mostly poorly understood functions, but are known to act as virulence factors in "Campylobacter" and contain surface enzymes in "Bacillus stearothermophilus".
Flagella are rigid protein structures, about 20 nanometres in diameter and up to 20 micrometres in length, that are used for motility. Flagella are driven by the energy released by the transfer of ions down an electrochemical gradient across the cell membrane.

Fimbriae (sometimes called "attachment pili") are fine filaments of protein, usually 2–10 nanometres in diameter and up to several micrometres in length. They are distributed over the surface of the cell, and resemble fine hairs when seen under the electron microscope. Fimbriae are believed to be involved in attachment to solid surfaces or to other cells, and are essential for the virulence of some bacterial pathogens. Pili ("sing". pilus) are cellular appendages, slightly larger than fimbriae, that can transfer genetic material between bacterial cells in a process called conjugation where they are called conjugation pili or sex pili (see bacterial genetics, below). They can also generate movement where they are called type IV pili.

Glycocalyx is produced by many bacteria to surround their cells, and varies in structural complexity: ranging from a disorganised slime layer of extracellular polymeric substances to a highly structured capsule. These structures can protect cells from engulfment by eukaryotic cells such as macrophages (part of the human immune system). They can also act as antigens and be involved in cell recognition, as well as aiding attachment to surfaces and the formation of biofilms.

The assembly of these extracellular structures is dependent on bacterial secretion systems. These transfer proteins from the cytoplasm into the periplasm or into the environment around the cell. Many types of secretion systems are known and these structures are often essential for the virulence of pathogens, so are intensively studied.

Certain genera of Gram-positive bacteria, such as "Bacillus", "Clostridium", "Sporohalobacter", "Anaerobacter", and "Heliobacterium", can form highly resistant, dormant structures called "endospores". Endospores develop within the cytoplasm of the cell; generally a single endospore develops in each cell. Each endospore contains a core of DNA and ribosomes surrounded by a cortex layer and protected by a multilayer rigid coat composed of peptidoglycan and a variety of proteins.

Endospores show no detectable metabolism and can survive extreme physical and chemical stresses, such as high levels of UV light, gamma radiation, detergents, disinfectants, heat, freezing, pressure, and desiccation. In this dormant state, these organisms may remain viable for millions of years, and endospores even allow bacteria to survive exposure to the vacuum and radiation in space. Endospore-forming bacteria can also cause disease: for example, anthrax can be contracted by the inhalation of "Bacillus anthracis" endospores, and contamination of deep puncture wounds with "Clostridium tetani" endospores causes tetanus.

Bacteria exhibit an extremely wide variety of metabolic types. The distribution of metabolic traits within a group of bacteria has traditionally been used to define their taxonomy, but these traits often do not correspond with modern genetic classifications. Bacterial metabolism is classified into nutritional groups on the basis of three major criteria: the source of energy, the electron donors used, and the source of carbon used for growth.

Bacteria either derive energy from light using photosynthesis (called phototrophy), or by breaking down chemical compounds using oxidation (called chemotrophy). Chemotrophs use chemical compounds as a source of energy by transferring electrons from a given electron donor to a terminal electron acceptor in a redox reaction. This reaction releases energy that can be used to drive metabolism. Chemotrophs are further divided by the types of compounds they use to transfer electrons. Bacteria that use inorganic compounds such as hydrogren, carbon monoxide, or ammonia as sources of electrons are called lithotrophs, while those that use organic compounds are called organotrophs. The compounds used to receive electrons are also used to classify bacteria: aerobic organisms use oxygen as the terminal electron acceptor, while anaerobic organisms use other compounds such as nitrate, sulfate, or carbon dioxide.

Many bacteria get their carbon from other organic carbon, called heterotrophy. Others such as cyanobacteria and some purple bacteria are autotrophic, meaning that they obtain cellular carbon by fixing carbon dioxide. In unusual circumstances, the gas methane can be used by methanotrophic bacteria as both a source of electrons and a substrate for carbon anabolism.

In many ways, bacterial metabolism provides traits that are useful for ecological stability and for human society. One example is that some bacteria have the ability to fix nitrogen gas using the enzyme nitrogenase. This environmentally important trait can be found in bacteria of most metabolic types listed above. This leads to the ecologically important processes of denitrification, sulfate reduction, and acetogenesis, respectively. Bacterial metabolic processes are also important in biological responses to pollution; for example, sulfate-reducing bacteria are largely responsible for the production of the highly toxic forms of mercury (methyl- and dimethylmercury) in the environment. Non-respiratory anaerobes use fermentation to generate energy and reducing power, secreting metabolic by-products (such as ethanol in brewing) as waste. Facultative anaerobes can switch between fermentation and different terminal electron acceptors depending on the environmental conditions in which they find themselves.

Unlike in multicellular organisms, increases in cell size (cell growth) and reproduction by cell division are tightly linked in unicellular organisms. Bacteria grow to a fixed size and then reproduce through binary fission, a form of asexual reproduction. Under optimal conditions, bacteria can grow and divide extremely rapidly, and bacterial populations can double as quickly as every 9.8 minutes. In cell division, two identical clone daughter cells are produced. Some bacteria, while still reproducing asexually, form more complex reproductive structures that help disperse the newly formed daughter cells. Examples include fruiting body formation by "Myxobacteria" and aerial hyphae formation by "Streptomyces", or budding. Budding involves a cell forming a protrusion that breaks away and produces a daughter cell.

In the laboratory, bacteria are usually grown using solid or liquid media. Solid growth media, such as agar plates, are used to isolate pure cultures of a bacterial strain. However, liquid growth media are used when the measurement of growth or large volumes of cells are required. Growth in stirred liquid media occurs as an even cell suspension, making the cultures easy to divide and transfer, although isolating single bacteria from liquid media is difficult. The use of selective media (media with specific nutrients added or deficient, or with antibiotics added) can help identify specific organisms.

Most laboratory techniques for growing bacteria use high levels of nutrients to produce large amounts of cells cheaply and quickly. However, in natural environments, nutrients are limited, meaning that bacteria cannot continue to reproduce indefinitely. This nutrient limitation has led the evolution of different growth strategies (see r/K selection theory). Some organisms can grow extremely rapidly when nutrients become available, such as the formation of algal (and cyanobacterial) blooms that often occur in lakes during the summer. Other organisms have adaptations to harsh environments, such as the production of multiple antibiotics by "Streptomyces" that inhibit the growth of competing microorganisms. In nature, many organisms live in communities (e.g., biofilms) that may allow for increased supply of nutrients and protection from environmental stresses. These relationships can be essential for growth of a particular organism or group of organisms (syntrophy).

Bacterial growth follows four phases. When a population of bacteria first enter a high-nutrient environment that allows growth, the cells need to adapt to their new environment. The first phase of growth is the lag phase, a period of slow growth when the cells are adapting to the high-nutrient environment and preparing for fast growth. The lag phase has high biosynthesis rates, as proteins necessary for rapid growth are produced. The second phase of growth is the logarithmic phase, also known as the exponential phase. The log phase is marked by rapid exponential growth. The rate at which cells grow during this phase is known as the "growth rate" ("k"), and the time it takes the cells to double is known as the "generation time" ("g"). During log phase, nutrients are metabolised at maximum speed until one of the nutrients is depleted and starts limiting growth. The third phase of growth is the "stationary phase" and is caused by depleted nutrients. The cells reduce their metabolic activity and consume non-essential cellular proteins. The stationary phase is a transition from rapid growth to a stress response state and there is increased expression of genes involved in DNA repair, antioxidant metabolism and nutrient transport. The final phase is the death phase where the bacteria run out of nutrients and die.

Most bacteria have a single circular chromosome that can range in size from only 160,000 base pairs in the endosymbiotic bacteria "Carsonella ruddii", to 12,200,000 base pairs (12.2 Mbp) in the soil-dwelling bacteria "Sorangium cellulosum". There are many exceptions to this, for example some "Streptomyces" and "Borrelia" species contain a single linear chromosome, while some "Vibrio" species contain more than one chromosome. Bacteria can also contain plasmids, small extra-chromosomal molecules of DNA that may contain genes for various useful functions such as antibiotic resistance, metabolic capabilities, or various virulence factors.

Bacteria genomes usually encode a few hundred to a few thousand genes. The genes in bacterial genomes are usually a single continuous stretch of DNA and although several different types of introns do exist in bacteria, these are much rarer than in eukaryotes.

Bacteria, as asexual organisms, inherit an identical copy of the parent's genomes and are clonal. However, all bacteria can evolve by selection on changes to their genetic material DNA caused by genetic recombination or mutations. Mutations come from errors made during the replication of DNA or from exposure to mutagens. Mutation rates vary widely among different species of bacteria and even among different clones of a single species of bacteria. Genetic changes in bacterial genomes come from either random mutation during replication or "stress-directed mutation", where genes involved in a particular growth-limiting process have an increased mutation rate.

Some bacteria also transfer genetic material between cells. This can occur in three main ways. First, bacteria can take up exogenous DNA from their environment, in a process called transformation. Many bacteria can naturally take up DNA from the environment, while others must be chemically altered in order to induce them to take up DNA. The development of competence in nature is usually associated with stressful environmental conditions, and seems to be an adaptation for facilitating repair of DNA damage in recipient cells. The second way bacteria transfer genetic material is by transduction, when the integration of a bacteriophage introduces foreign DNA into the chromosome. Many types of bacteriophage exist, some simply infect and lyse their host bacteria, while others insert into the bacterial chromosome. Bacteria resist phage infection through restriction modification systems that degrade foreign DNA, and a system that uses CRISPR sequences to retain fragments of the genomes of phage that the bacteria have come into contact with in the past, which allows them to block virus replication through a form of RNA interference. The third method of gene transfer is conjugation, whereby DNA is transferred through direct cell contact. In ordinary circumstances, transduction, conjugation, and transformation involve transfer of DNA between individual bacteria of the same species, but occasionally transfer may occur between individuals of different bacterial species and this may have significant consequences, such as the transfer of antibiotic resistance. In such cases, gene acquisition from other bacteria or the environment is called horizontal gene transfer and may be common under natural conditions.

Many bacteria are motile (able to move themselves) and do so using a variety of mechanisms. The best studied of these are flagella, long filaments that are turned by a motor at the base to generate propeller-like movement. The bacterial flagellum is made of about 20 proteins, with approximately another 30 proteins required for its regulation and assembly. The flagellum is a rotating structure driven by a reversible motor at the base that uses the electrochemical gradient across the membrane for power.
Bacteria can use flagella in different ways to generate different kinds of movement. Many bacteria (such as "E. coli") have two distinct modes of movement: forward movement (swimming) and tumbling. The tumbling allows them to reorient and makes their movement a three-dimensional random walk. Bacterial species differ in the number and arrangement of flagella on their surface; some have a single flagellum ("monotrichous"), a flagellum at each end ("amphitrichous"), clusters of flagella at the poles of the cell ("lophotrichous"), while others have flagella distributed over the entire surface of the cell ("peritrichous"). The flagella of a unique group of bacteria, the spirochaetes, are found between two membranes in the periplasmic space. They have a distinctive helical body that twists about as it moves.

Two other types of bacterial motion are called twitching motility that relies on a structure called the type IV pilus, and gliding motility, that uses other mechanisms. In twitching motility, the rod-like pilus extends out from the cell, binds some substrate, and then retracts, pulling the cell forward.

Motile bacteria are attracted or repelled by certain stimuli in behaviours called taxes: these include chemotaxis, phototaxis, energy taxis, and magnetotaxis. In one peculiar group, the myxobacteria, individual bacteria move together to form waves of cells that then differentiate to form fruiting bodies containing spores. The myxobacteria move only when on solid surfaces, unlike "E. coli", which is motile in liquid or solid media.

Several "Listeria" and "Shigella" species move inside host cells by usurping the cytoskeleton, which is normally used to move organelles inside the cell. By promoting actin polymerisation at one pole of their cells, they can form a kind of tail that pushes them through the host cell's cytoplasm.

A few bacteria have chemical systems that generate light. This bioluminescence often occurs in bacteria that live in association with fish, and the light probably serves to attract fish or other large animals.

Bacteria often function as multicellular aggregates known as biofilms, exchanging a variety of molecular signals for inter-cell communication, and engaging in coordinated multicellular behaviour.

The communal benefits of multicellular cooperation include a cellular division of labour, accessing resources that cannot effectively be used by single cells, collectively defending against antagonists, and optimising population survival by differentiating into distinct cell types. For example, bacteria in biofilms can have more than 500 times increased resistance to antibacterial agents than individual "planktonic" bacteria of the same species.

One type of inter-cellular communication by a molecular signal is called quorum sensing, which serves the purpose of determining whether there is a local population density that is sufficiently high that it is productive to invest in processes that are only successful if large numbers of similar organisms behave similarly, as in excreting digestive enzymes or emitting light.

Quorum sensing allows bacteria to coordinate gene expression, and enables them to produce, release and detect autoinducers or pheromones which accumulate with the growth in cell population.

Classification seeks to describe the diversity of bacterial species by naming and grouping organisms based on similarities. Bacteria can be classified on the basis of cell structure, cellular metabolism or on differences in cell components, such as DNA, fatty acids, pigments, antigens and quinones. While these schemes allowed the identification and classification of bacterial strains, it was unclear whether these differences represented variation between distinct species or between strains of the same species. This uncertainty was due to the lack of distinctive structures in most bacteria, as well as lateral gene transfer between unrelated species. Due to lateral gene transfer, some closely related bacteria can have very different morphologies and metabolisms. To overcome this uncertainty, modern bacterial classification emphasises molecular systematics, using genetic techniques such as guanine cytosine ratio determination, genome-genome hybridisation, as well as sequencing genes that have not undergone extensive lateral gene transfer, such as the rRNA gene. Classification of bacteria is determined by publication in the International Journal of Systematic Bacteriology, and Bergey's Manual of Systematic Bacteriology. The International Committee on Systematic Bacteriology (ICSB) maintains international rules for the naming of bacteria and taxonomic categories and for the ranking of them in the International Code of Nomenclature of Bacteria.

The term "bacteria" was traditionally applied to all microscopic, single-cell prokaryotes. However, molecular systematics showed prokaryotic life to consist of two separate domains, originally called "Eubacteria" and "Archaebacteria", but now called "Bacteria" and "Archaea" that evolved independently from an ancient common ancestor. The archaea and eukaryotes are more closely related to each other than either is to the bacteria. These two domains, along with Eukarya, are the basis of the three-domain system, which is currently the most widely used classification system in microbiology. However, due to the relatively recent introduction of molecular systematics and a rapid increase in the number of genome sequences that are available, bacterial classification remains a changing and expanding field. For example, a few biologists argue that the Archaea and Eukaryotes evolved from Gram-positive bacteria.

The identification of bacteria in the laboratory is particularly relevant in medicine, where the correct treatment is determined by the bacterial species causing an infection. Consequently, the need to identify human pathogens was a major impetus for the development of techniques to identify bacteria.

The "Gram stain", developed in 1884 by Hans Christian Gram, characterises bacteria based on the structural characteristics of their cell walls. The thick layers of peptidoglycan in the "Gram-positive" cell wall stain purple, while the thin "Gram-negative" cell wall appears pink. By combining morphology and Gram-staining, most bacteria can be classified as belonging to one of four groups (Gram-positive cocci, Gram-positive bacilli, Gram-negative cocci and Gram-negative bacilli). Some organisms are best identified by stains other than the Gram stain, particularly mycobacteria or "Nocardia", which show acid-fastness on Ziehl–Neelsen or similar stains. Other organisms may need to be identified by their growth in special media, or by other techniques, such as serology.

Culture techniques are designed to promote the growth and identify particular bacteria, while restricting the growth of the other bacteria in the sample. Often these techniques are designed for specific specimens; for example, a sputum sample will be treated to identify organisms that cause pneumonia, while stool specimens are cultured on selective media to identify organisms that cause diarrhoea, while preventing growth of non-pathogenic bacteria. Specimens that are normally sterile, such as blood, urine or spinal fluid, are cultured under conditions designed to grow all possible organisms. Once a pathogenic organism has been isolated, it can be further characterised by its morphology, growth patterns (such as aerobic or anaerobic growth), patterns of hemolysis, and staining.

As with bacterial classification, identification of bacteria is increasingly using molecular methods. Diagnostics using DNA-based tools, such as polymerase chain reaction, are increasingly popular due to their specificity and speed, compared to culture-based methods. These methods also allow the detection and identification of "viable but nonculturable" cells that are metabolically active but non-dividing. However, even using these improved methods, the total number of bacterial species is not known and cannot even be estimated with any certainty. Following present classification, there are a little less than 9,300 known species of prokaryotes, which includes bacteria and archaea; but attempts to estimate the true number of bacterial diversity have ranged from 10 to 10 total species—and even these diverse estimates may be off by many orders of magnitude.

Despite their apparent simplicity, bacteria can form complex associations with other organisms. These symbiotic associations can be divided into parasitism, mutualism and commensalism. Due to their small size, commensal bacteria are ubiquitous and grow on animals and plants exactly as they will grow on any other surface. However, their growth can be increased by warmth and sweat, and large populations of these organisms in humans are the cause of body odour.

Some species of bacteria kill and then consume other microorganisms, these species are called "predatory bacteria". These include organisms such as "Myxococcus xanthus", which forms swarms of cells that kill and digest any bacteria they encounter. Other bacterial predators either attach to their prey in order to digest them and absorb nutrients, such as "Vampirovibrio chlorellavorus", or invade another cell and multiply inside the cytosol, such as "Daptobacter". These predatory bacteria are thought to have evolved from saprophages that consumed dead microorganisms, through adaptations that allowed them to entrap and kill other organisms.

Certain bacteria form close spatial associations that are essential for their survival. One such mutualistic association, called interspecies hydrogen transfer, occurs between clusters of anaerobic bacteria that consume organic acids, such as butyric acid or propionic acid, and produce hydrogen, and methanogenic Archaea that consume hydrogen. The bacteria in this association are unable to consume the organic acids as this reaction produces hydrogen that accumulates in their surroundings. Only the intimate association with the hydrogen-consuming Archaea keeps the hydrogen concentration low enough to allow the bacteria to grow.

In soil, microorganisms that reside in the rhizosphere (a zone that includes the root surface and the soil that adheres to the root after gentle shaking) carry out nitrogen fixation, converting nitrogen gas to nitrogenous compounds. This serves to provide an easily absorbable form of nitrogen for many plants, which cannot fix nitrogen themselves. Many other bacteria are found as symbionts in humans and other organisms. For example, the presence of over 1,000 bacterial species in the normal human gut flora of the intestines can contribute to gut immunity, synthesise vitamins, such as folic acid, vitamin K and biotin, convert sugars to lactic acid (see "Lactobacillus"), as well as fermenting complex undigestible carbohydrates. The presence of this gut flora also inhibits the growth of potentially pathogenic bacteria (usually through competitive exclusion) and these beneficial bacteria are consequently sold as probiotic dietary supplements.

If bacteria form a parasitic association with other organisms, they are classed as pathogens. Pathogenic bacteria are a major cause of human death and disease and cause infections such as tetanus (Caused by "Clostridium tetani"), typhoid fever, diphtheria, syphilis, cholera, foodborne illness, leprosy (caused by "Micobacterium leprae)" and tuberculosis (Caused by "Mycobacterium tubeculosis"). A pathogenic cause for a known medical disease may only be discovered many years after, as was the case with "Helicobacter pylori" and peptic ulcer disease. Bacterial diseases are also important in agriculture, with bacteria causing leaf spot, fire blight and wilts in plants, as well as Johne's disease, mastitis, salmonella and anthrax in farm animals.

Each species of pathogen has a characteristic spectrum of interactions with its human hosts. Some organisms, such as "Staphylococcus" or "Streptococcus", can cause skin infections, pneumonia, meningitis and even overwhelming sepsis, a systemic inflammatory response producing shock, massive vasodilation and death. Yet these organisms are also part of the normal human flora and usually exist on the skin or in the nose without causing any disease at all. Other organisms invariably cause disease in humans, such as the Rickettsia, which are obligate intracellular parasites able to grow and reproduce only within the cells of other organisms. One species of Rickettsia causes typhus, while another causes Rocky Mountain spotted fever. "Chlamydia", another phylum of obligate intracellular parasites, contains species that can cause pneumonia, or urinary tract infection and may be involved in coronary heart disease. Finally, some species, such as "Pseudomonas aeruginosa", "Burkholderia cenocepacia", and "Mycobacterium avium", are opportunistic pathogens and cause disease mainly in people suffering from immunosuppression or cystic fibrosis.

Bacterial infections may be treated with antibiotics, which are classified as bacteriocidal if they kill bacteria, or bacteriostatic if they just prevent bacterial growth. There are many types of antibiotics and each class inhibits a process that is different in the pathogen from that found in the host. An example of how antibiotics produce selective toxicity are chloramphenicol and puromycin, which inhibit the bacterial ribosome, but not the structurally different eukaryotic ribosome. Antibiotics are used both in treating human disease and in intensive farming to promote animal growth, where they may be contributing to the rapid development of antibiotic resistance in bacterial populations. Infections can be prevented by antiseptic measures such as sterilising the skin prior to piercing it with the needle of a syringe, and by proper care of indwelling catheters. Surgical and dental instruments are also sterilised to prevent contamination by bacteria. Disinfectants such as bleach are used to kill bacteria or other pathogens on surfaces to prevent contamination and further reduce the risk of infection.

Bacteria, often lactic acid bacteria, such as "Lactobacillus" and "Lactococcus", in combination with yeasts and moulds, have been used for thousands of years in the preparation of fermented foods, such as cheese, pickles, soy sauce, sauerkraut, vinegar, wine and yogurt.

The ability of bacteria to degrade a variety of organic compounds is remarkable and has been used in waste processing and bioremediation. Bacteria capable of digesting the hydrocarbons in petroleum are often used to clean up oil spills. Fertiliser was added to some of the beaches in Prince William Sound in an attempt to promote the growth of these naturally occurring bacteria after the 1989 "Exxon Valdez" oil spill. These efforts were effective on beaches that were not too thickly covered in oil. Bacteria are also used for the bioremediation of industrial toxic wastes. In the chemical industry, bacteria are most important in the production of enantiomerically pure chemicals for use as pharmaceuticals or agrichemicals.

Bacteria can also be used in the place of pesticides in the biological pest control. This commonly involves "Bacillus thuringiensis" (also called BT), a Gram-positive, soil dwelling bacterium. Subspecies of this bacteria are used as a Lepidopteran-specific insecticides under trade names such as Dipel and Thuricide. Because of their specificity, these pesticides are regarded as environmentally friendly, with little or no effect on humans, wildlife, pollinators and most other beneficial insects.

Because of their ability to quickly grow and the relative ease with which they can be manipulated, bacteria are the workhorses for the fields of molecular biology, genetics and biochemistry. By making mutations in bacterial DNA and examining the resulting phenotypes, scientists can determine the function of genes, enzymes and metabolic pathways in bacteria, then apply this knowledge to more complex organisms. This aim of understanding the biochemistry of a cell reaches its most complex expression in the synthesis of huge amounts of enzyme kinetic and gene expression data into mathematical models of entire organisms. This is achievable in some well-studied bacteria, with models of "Escherichia coli" metabolism now being produced and tested. This understanding of bacterial metabolism and genetics allows the use of biotechnology to bioengineer bacteria for the production of therapeutic proteins, such as insulin, growth factors, or antibodies.

Because of their importance for research in general, samples of bacterial strains are isolated and preserved in Biological Resource Centers. This ensures the availability of the strain to scientists worldwide.

Bacteria were first observed by the Dutch microscopist Antonie van Leeuwenhoek in 1676, using a single-lens microscope of his own design. He then published his observations in a series of letters to the Royal Society of London. Bacteria were Leeuwenhoek's most remarkable microscopic discovery. They were just at the limit of what his simple lenses could make out and, in one of the most striking hiatuses in the history of science, no one else would see them again for over a century. His observations had also included protozoans which he called animalcules, and his findings were looked at again in the light of the more recent findings of cell theory.

Christian Gottfried Ehrenberg introduced the word "bacterium" in 1828. In fact, his "Bacterium" was a genus that contained non-spore-forming rod-shaped bacteria, as opposed to "Bacillus", a genus of spore-forming rod-shaped bacteria defined by Ehrenberg in 1835.

Louis Pasteur demonstrated in 1859 that the growth of microorganisms causes the fermentation process, and that this growth is not due to spontaneous generation (yeasts and molds, commonly associated with fermentation, are not bacteria, but rather fungi). Along with his contemporary Robert Koch, Pasteur was an early advocate of the germ theory of disease.

Robert Koch, a pioneer in medical microbiology, worked on cholera, anthrax and tuberculosis. In his research into tuberculosis Koch finally proved the germ theory, for which he received a Nobel Prize in 1905. In Koch's postulates, he set out criteria to test if an organism is the cause of a disease, and these postulates are still used today.

Ferdinand Cohn is said to be a founder of bacteriology, studying bacteria from 1870. Cohn was the first to classify bacteria based on their morphology.

Though it was known in the nineteenth century that bacteria are the cause of many diseases, no effective antibacterial treatments were available. In 1910, Paul Ehrlich developed the first antibiotic, by changing dyes that selectively stained "Treponema pallidum"—the spirochaete that causes syphilis—into compounds that selectively killed the pathogen. Ehrlich had been awarded a 1908 Nobel Prize for his work on immunology, and pioneered the use of stains to detect and identify bacteria, with his work being the basis of the Gram stain and the Ziehl–Neelsen stain.

A major step forward in the study of bacteria came in 1977 when Carl Woese recognised that archaea have a separate line of evolutionary descent from bacteria. This new phylogenetic taxonomy depended on the sequencing of 16S ribosomal RNA, and divided prokaryotes into two evolutionary domains, as part of the three-domain system.




</doc>
<doc id="16052279" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16052279" title="Bioprecipitation">
Bioprecipitation

Bioprecipitation is the concept of rain-making bacteria and was proposed by David Sands from Montana State University in 1982. The formation of ice in clouds is required for snow and most rainfall. Dust and soot particles can serve as ice nuclei, but biological ice nuclei are capable of catalyzing freezing at much warmer temperatures. The ice-nucleating bacteria currently known are mostly plant pathogens. Recent research suggests that bacteria may be present in clouds as part of an evolved process of dispersal.

Ice-nucleating proteins derived from ice-nucleating bacteria are used for snowmaking.

Most known ice-nucleating bacteria are plant pathogens. These pathogens can cause freezing injury in plants. In the United States alone, it has been estimated that frost accounts for approximately $1 billion in crop damage each year. The ice-minus variant of "P. syringae" is a mutant, lacking the gene responsible for ice-nucleating surface protein production. This lack of surface protein provides a less favorable environment for ice formation. Both strains of P. syringae occur naturally, but recombinant DNA technology has allowed for the synthetic removal or alteration of specific genes, enabling the creation of the ice-minus strain. The introduction of an ice-minus strain of P. syringae to the surface of plants would incur competition between the strains. Should the ice-minus strain win out, the ice nucleate provided by P. syringae would no longer be present, lowering the level of frost development on plant surfaces at normal water freezing temperature (0°C).

Bacteria present in clouds may have evolved to use rainfall as a means of dispersing themselves. The bacteria are found in snow, soils and seedlings in locations such as Antarctica, the Yukon Territory of Canada and the French Alps, according to Brent Christner, a microbiologist at Louisiana State University. It has been suggested that the bacteria are part of a constant feedback between terrestrial ecosystems and clouds. They may rely on the rainfall to spread to new habitats, in much the same way as plants rely on windblown pollen grains, Christner said, with this possibly a key element of the bacterial life cycle.

Many ski resorts use a commercially available freeze-dried preparation of ice-nucleating proteins derived from the bacterium species Pseudomonas syringae to make snow in a snowgun. 



</doc>
<doc id="12026220" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12026220" title="Carcinogenic bacteria">
Carcinogenic bacteria

Cancer bacteria are bacteria infectious organisms that are known or suspected to cause cancer. While cancer-associated bacteria have long been considered to be opportunistic (i.e., infecting healthy tissues after cancer has already established itself), there is some evidence that bacteria may be directly carcinogenic. The strongest evidence to date involves the bacterium "H. pylori" and its role in gastric cancer.

Oncoviruses are viral agents that are similarly suspected of causing cancer.

"Helicobacter pylori" colonizes the human stomach and duodenum. In some cases it can cause stomach cancer and MALT lymphoma. Animal models have demonstrated Koch's third and fourth postulates for the role of "Helicobacter pylori" in the causation of stomach cancer. The mechanism by which "H. pylori" causes cancer may involve chronic inflammation, or the direct action of some of its virulence factors, for example, CagA has been implicated in carcinogenesis.

A number of bacteria have associations with cancer, although their possible role in carcinogenesis is unclear. 
"Salmonella" Typhi has been linked to gallbladder cancer but may also be useful in delivering chemotherapeutic agents for the treatment of melanoma, colon and bladder cancer. Bacteria found in the gut may be related to colon cancer but may be more complicated due to the role of chemoprotective probiotic cancers. Microorganisms and their metabolic byproducts, or impact of chronic inflammation, may also be linked to oral cancers.

The relationship between cancer and bacteria may be complicated by different individuals reacting in different ways to different cancers.

In 1890, the Scottish pathologist William Russell reported circumstantial evidence for the bacterial cause of cancer. In 1926, Canadian physician Thomas Glover reported that he could consistently isolate a specific bacterium from the neoplastic tissues of animals and humans. One review summarized Glover's report as follows:

Glover was asked to continue his work at the Public Health Service (later incorporated into the National Institutes of Health) completing his studies in 1929 and publishing his findings in 1930. He asserted that a vaccine or anti-serum manufactured from his bacterium could be used to treat cancer patients with varying degrees of success. According to historical accounts, scientists from the Public Health Service challenged Glover’s claims and asked him to repeat his research to better establish quality control. Glover refused and opted to continue his research independently; not seeking consensus, Glover's claims and results led to controversy and are today not given serious merit.

In 1950, a Newark-based physician named Virginia Livingston published a paper claiming that a specific "Mycobacterium" was associated with neoplasia. Livingston continued to research the alleged bacterium throughout the 1950s and eventually proposed the name "Progenitor cryptocides" as well as developed a treatment protocol. Ultimately, her claim of a universal cancer bacterium was not supported in follow up studies. In 1990 the National Cancer Institute published a review of Livingston's theories, concluding that her methods of classifying the cancer bacterium contained "remarkable errors" and it was actually a case of misclassification - the bacterium was actually "Staphylococcus epidermidis".

Other researchers and clinicians who worked with the theory that bacteria could cause cancer, especially from the 1930s to the 1960s, included Eleanor Alexander-Jackson, William Coley, William Crofton, Gunther Enderlein, Franz Gerlach, Josef Issels, Elise L'Esperance, Milbank Johnson, Arthur Kendall, Royal Rife, Florence Seibert, Wilhelm von Brehmer, and Ernest Villequez. Alexander-Jackson and Seibert worked with Virginia Livingston. Some of the researchers published reports that also claimed to have found bacteria associated with different types of cancers.




</doc>
<doc id="33177867" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33177867" title="Bacterial cellulose">
Bacterial cellulose

Bacterial cellulose is an organic compound with the formula produced by certain types of bacteria. While cellulose is a basic structural material of most plants, it is also produced by bacteria, principally of the genera "Acetobacter", "Sarcina ventriculi" and "Agrobacterium". Bacterial, or microbial, cellulose has different properties from plant cellulose and is characterized by high purity, strength, moldability and increased water holding ability. In natural habitats, the majority of bacteria synthesize extracellular polysaccharides, such as cellulose, which form protective envelopes around the cells. While bacterial cellulose is produced in nature, many methods are currently being investigated to enhance cellulose growth from cultures in laboratories as a large-scale process. By controlling synthesis methods, the resulting microbial cellulose can be tailored to have specific desirable properties. For example, attention has been given to the bacteria "Acetobacter xylinum" due to its cellulose's unique mechanical properties and applications to biotechnology, microbiology, and materials science. Historically, bacterial cellulose has been limited to the manufacture of Nata de coco, a South-East Asian food product. With advances in the ability to synthesize and characterize bacterial cellulose, the material is being used for a wide variety of commercial applications including textiles, cosmetics, and food products, as well as medical applications. Many patents have been issued in microbial cellulose applications and several active areas of research are attempting to better characterize microbial cellulose and utilize it in new areas.
As a material, cellulose was first discovered in 1838 by Anselme Payen. Payen was able to isolate the cellulose from the other plant matter and chemically characterize it. In one of its first and most common industrial applications, cellulose from wood pulp was used to manufacture paper. It is ideal for displaying information in print form due to its high reflectivity, high contrast, low cost and flexibility. The discovery of cellulose produced by bacteria, specifically from the "Acetobacter xylinum", was accredited to A.J. Brown in 1886 with the synthesis of an extracellular gelatinous mat. However, it was not until the 20th century that more intensive studies on bacterial cellulose were conducted. Several decades after the initial discovery of microbial cellulose, C.A. Browne studied the cellulose material obtained by fermentation of Louisiana sugar cane juice and affirmed the results by A.J. Brown. Other researchers reported the formation of cellulose by other various organisms such as the "Acetobacter pasteurianum", "Acetobacter rancens", "Sarcina ventriculi", and "Bacterium xylinoides". In 1931, Tarr and Hibbert published the first detailed study of the formation of bacterial cellulose by conducting a series of experiments to grow "A. xylinum" on culture mediums.

In the mid-1900s, Hestrin et al. proved the necessity of glucose and oxygen in the synthesis of bacterial cellulose. Soon after, Colvin detected cellulose synthesis in samples containing cell-free extract of "A. xylinum", glucose and ATP. In 1949, the microfibrillar structure of bacterial cellulose was characterized by Muhlethaler. Further bacterial cellulose studies have led to new uses and applications for the material.

Bacteria that produce cellulose include Gram-negative bacteria species such as "Acetobacter", "Azotobacter", "Rhizobium", "Pseudomonas", "Salmonella", "Alcaligenes", and Gram-positive bacteria species such as "Sarcina ventriculi". The most effective producers of cellulose are "A. xylinum", "A. hansenii", and "A. pasteurianus". Of these, "A. xylinum" is the model microorganism for basic and applied studies on cellulose due to its ability to produce relatively high levels of polymer from a wide range of carbon and nitrogen sources.

The synthesis of bacterial cellulose is a multistep process that involve two main mechanisms: the synthesis of uridine diphosphoglucose (UDPGIc), followed by the polymerization of glucose into long and unbranched chains (the β-1→4 glucan chain) by cellulose synthase. Specifics on the cellulose synthesis has been extensively documented. The former mechanism is well known while the latter still needs exploring. The production of UDPGIc starts with carbon compounds (such as hexoses, glycerol, dihydroxyacetone, pyruvate, and dicarboxylic acids) entering the Krebs cycle, gluconeogenesis, or the pentose phosphate cycle depending on what carbon source is available. It then goes through phosphorylation along with catalysis, followed by isomerization of the intermediate, and a process known as UDPGIc pyrophosphorylase to convert the compounds into UDPGIc, a precursor to the production of cellulose. The polymerization of glucose into the β-1→4 glucan chain has been hypothesized to either involve a lipid intermediate or not to involve a lipid intermediate, though structural enzymology studies and "in vitro" experiments indicate that polymerization can occur by direct enzymatic transfer of a glucosyl moiety from a nucleotide sugar to the growing polysaccharide. "A. xylinum" usually converts carbon compounds into cellulose with around 50% efficiency.

Cellulose production depends heavily on several factors such as the growth medium, environmental conditions, and the formation of byproducts. The fermentation medium contains carbon, nitrogen, and other macro and micro nutrients required for bacteria growth. Bacteria are most efficient when supplied with an abundant carbon source and minimal nitrogen source. Glucose and sucrose are the most commonly used carbon sources for cellulose production, while fructose, maltose, xylose, starch, and glycerol have been tried. Sometimes, ethanol may be used to increase cellulose production. The problem with using glucose is that gluconic acid is formed as a byproduct which decreases the pH of the culture and in turn, decreases the production of cellulose. Studies have shown that gluconic acid production can be decreased in the presence of lignosulfonate. Addition of organic acids, specifically acetic acid, also helped in a higher yield of cellulose. Studies of using molasses medium in a jar fermentor as well as added components of sugarcane molasses on certain strains of bacteria have been studied with results showing increases in cellulose production.

Addition of extra nitrogen generally decreases cellulose production while addition of precursor molecules such as amino acids and methionine improved yield. Pyridoxine, nicotinic acid, p-aminobenzoic acid and biotin are vitamins important for cellulose production whereas pantothenate and riboflavin have opposing effects. In reactors where the process is more complex, water-soluble polysaccharides such as agar, acetan, and sodium alginate are added to prevent clumping or coagulation of bacterial cellulose.

The other main environmental factors affecting cellulose production are pH, temperature, and dissolved oxygen. According to experimental studies, the optimal temperature for maximum production was between 28 and 30 °C. For most species, the optimal pH was between 4.0-6.0. Controlling pH is especially important in static cultures as the accumulation of gluconic, acetic, or lactic acid decreases the pH far lower than the optimal range. Dissolved oxygen content can be varied with stirrer speed as it is needed for static cultures where substrates need to be transported by diffusion.

Static and agitated cultures are conventional ways to produce bacterial cellulose. Both static and agitated cultures are not feasible for large-scale production as static cultures have a long culture period as well as intensive manpower and agitated cultures produce cellulose-negative mutants alongside its reactions due to rapid growth. Thus, reactors are designed to lessen culture time and inhibit the conversion of bacterial cellulose-producing strains into cellulose-negative mutants. Common reactors used are the rotating disk reactor, the rotary biofilm contactor (RBC), a bioreactor equipped with a spin filter, and a reactor with a silicone membrane.

As the Earth’s most common organic material, cellulose can be classified into plant cellulose and bacterial cellulose, both of which are naturally occurring. Plant cellulose, which makes up the cell walls of most plants, is a tough, mesh-like bulkwork in which cellulose fibrils are the primary architectural elements. While bacterial cellulose has the same molecular formula as plant cellulose, it has significantly different macromolecular properties and characteristics. In general, microbial cellulose is more chemically pure, containing no hemicellulose or lignin, has a higher water holding capacity and hydrophilicity, greater tensile strength resulting from a larger amount of polymerization, ultrafine network architecture. Furthermore, bacterial cellulose can be produced on a variety of substrates and can be grown to virtually any shape due to the high moldability during formation. Additionally, bacterial cellulose has a more crystalline structure compared to plant cellulose and forms characteristic ribbon-like microfibrils. A hallmark of microbial cellulose, these thin microfibrils are significantly smaller than those in plant cellulose, making bacterial cellulose much more porous.
Cellulose is composed of carbon, oxygen, and hydrogen, and is classified as a polysaccharide, indicating it is a carbohydrate that exhibits polymeric characteristics. Cellulose is composed of straight chain polymers, whose base units of glucose are held together by beta-linkages.

The structural role of cellulose in cell walls has been likened to that of the glass strands of fiberglass or to the supporting rods within reinforced concrete. Cellulose fibrils are highly insoluble and inelastic and, because of their molecular configuration, have a tensile strength comparable to that of steel. Consequently, cellulose imparts a unique combination of chemical resilience and mechanical support and flexibility to the tissues in which it resides. Bacterial cellulose, produced by "Acetobacter" species, displays unique properties, including high mechanical strength, high water absorption capacity, high crystallinity, and an ultra-fine and highly pure fiber network structure. One of the most important features of bacterial cellulose is its chemical purity. In addition to this, bacterial cellulose is stable towards chemicals and at high temperatures. Bacterial cellulose has been suggested to have a construction like a ‘cage' which protects the cell from foreign material and heavy-metal ions, while still allowing nutrients to be supplied easily by diffusion. Bacterial cellulose was described by Louis Pasteur as "a sort of moist skin, swollen, gelatinous and slippery." Although the solid portion in the gel is less than one percent, it is almost pure cellulose containing no lignin and other foreign substances. Although bacterial cellulose is obtained in the form of a highly swollen gel, the texture is quite unique and different from typical gels. Cellulose has a high swollen fiber network resulting from the presence of pore structures and tunnels within the wet pellicle. Plant cellulose water retention values 60%, while bacterial cellulose has a water retention value of 1000%.
The formation of the cellulose pellicle occurs on the upper surface of the supernatant film. A large surface area is important for a good productivity. The cellulose formation occurs at the air/cellulose pellicle interface and not at the medium/cellulose interface. Thus oxygen is an important factor for cellulose production. After an inducing and a rapid growth period, the thickness increases steadily. Fibrils appear to be not necessarily linear but contain some "three-way branching points" along their length. This type of branching is considered to be related to the unique characteristics of this material and occurs from branching points produced by cell mitosis.
Sheet-shaped material prepared from bacterial cellulose has remarkable mechanical properties. According to Brown, the pellicle of bacterial cellulose was "very tough, especially if an attempt was made to tear it across its plane of growth". The Young's modulus for bacterial cellulose has been reported to be as high as 15 GPa across the plane of the sheet, whereas the highest values attained in the past by polymeric films or sheets is < 10GPa at most. The sheet's high Young's modulus has been attributed to the unique super-molecular structure in which fibrils of biological origin are preserved and bound tightly by hydrogen bonds. This Young's modulus does not vary with temperature nor the cultivation process used. The very high Young's modulus of this material must be ascribed to its super-molecular structure.

This property arises from adjacently aligned glucan chains participating in inter- and intrachain hydrogen bonding. Bacterial cellulose subfibrils are crystallized into microfibrils which group to form bundles, that then form 'ribbons'. These fibers are two orders of magnitude thinner than cellulose fibers produced by pulping wood. Today, it is known that the pellicle comprises a random assembly of fibrils (< 130 nm wide), which are composed of a bundle of much finer microfibrils (2 to 4 nm diameter). It is also known that the pellicle gives a film or sheet when dried if the shrinkage across the plane is restricted.
The ultrafine ribbons of microbial cellulose form a dense reticulated structure, stabilized by extensive hydrogen bonding. Bacterial cellulose is also distinguished from its plant counterpart by a high crystallinity index (above 60%). Two common crystalline forms of cellulose, designated as I and II, are distinguishable by X-ray, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), Raman spectroscopy, and infrared analysis.
Bacterial cellulose belongs crystallographically to Cellulose I, common with natural cellulose of vegetable origin, in which two cellulose units are arranged parallel in a unit cell.
The term Cellulose I is used for this parallel arrangement, whereas crystalline fibrils bearing antiparallel polyglucan chains arise forming the thermodynamically stable Cellulose II. The molecular arrangement in the sheet, confirmed by X-ray diffraction, was such that the molecular chain axis lay randomly perpendicular to the thickness such that the (1 1 0) plane was oriented parallel to the surface.

Although cellulose forms a distinct crystalline structure, cellulose fibers in nature are not purely crystalline. In addition to the crystalline and amorphous regions, cellulose fibers contain various types of irregularities, such as kinks or twists of the microfibrils, or voids such as surface micropores, large pits, and capillaries. Thus, the total surface area of a cellulose fiber is much greater than the surface area of an ideally smooth fiber of the same dimension. The net effect of structural heterogeneity within the fiber is that the fibers are at least partially hydrated by water when immersed in aqueous media, and some micropores and capillaries are sufficiently spacious to permit penetration.

Scanning electron microscopy of a fractured edge has revealed a pile of very thin layers. It is suggested that these fibrils in layers are bound through interfibrillar hydrogen bonds, just as in pulp-papers, but the density of the interfibrillar hydrogen bonds must be much higher as the fibrils are finer, hence the contact area is larger.

Bacterial cellulose has a wide variety of current and potential future applications. Due to its many unique properties, it has been used in the food industry, the medical field, commercial and industrial products, and other technical areas. Bacterial cellulose is a versatile structural material, allowing it to be shaped in a variety of ways to accommodate different uses. A number of patents have been issued for processes involving this material.<nowiki> . Bacterial cellulose pellicles were proposed as a temporary skin substitute in case of human burns and other dermal injuries [44. Fontana, J.D. et al (1990) "Acetobacter cellulose pellicle as a temporary skin substituite". .Applie d Biochemistry and Biotechnology (Humana Press) 24-25 : 253-264]. </nowiki>

The oldest known use of bacterial cellulose is as the raw material of nata de coco, a traditional sweet candy dessert of the Philippines<nowiki>. Several natural colored pigments (oxycarotenoids, anthocyanins and related antioxidants and free radical scavengers) were incorporated in to bacterial cellulose cubes in order to render the dessert more attractive [45. Fontana, J.D. et al (2017)  Handbook of Food Bioengineering, Elsevier / Academic Press, chapter 7 : New Insights on Bacterial Cellulose, pages 213-249]. Bacterial cellulose has also been used as a thickener to maintain the </nowiki>viscosity in food and as a stabilizing agent. Due to its texture and fiber content, it has been added to many food products as a dietary fiber. A specific example is Cellulon ®, which is a bulking agent used as a food ingredient to act as a thickener, texturizer, and/or calorie reducer. Microbial cellulose has also been used as an additive in diet beverages in Japan since 1992, specifically kombucha, a fermented tea drink.

Bacterial cellulose also has wide applications in commercial industries. In papermaking, it is used as an ultra-strength paper and as a reticulated fine fibre network with coating, binding, thickening and suspending characteristics. Due to its high sonic velocity and low dynamic loss, bacterial cellulose has been used as an acoustic or filter membrane in hi-fidelity loudspeakers and headphones as marketed by the Sony Corporation. Bacterial cellulose is also used as an additive in the cosmetic industry. Furthermore, it is being tested in the textile industry, with the possibility of manufacturing cellulose based clothing.

In more modern applications, microbial cellulose has become relevant in the medical sector. It has been tested and successfully used as a wound dressing, especially in burn cases. Studies have shown that burns treated with microbial cellulose coverings healed faster than traditional treatments and had less scarring. The microbial cellulose topical applications are effective due to the cellulose's water holding ability and water vapor permeability. The high water holding ability provides a moist atmosphere at the injury site, which is critical in healing, while the wicking ability allows seepage from the wound to be removed from the site. Also, the microbial cellulose molds very well to the surface of the skin, providing a conformal covering even in usually difficult places to dress wounds, such as areas on the face. This technique has been so successful that commercial microbial cellulose products, such as Biofill ®, have been developed. Another microbial cellulose commercial treatment product is XCell produced by the Xylos Corporation, which is mainly used to treat wounds from venous ulcers. Studies have also been performed where traditional gauze dressings are treated with a microbial cellulose biopolymer to enhance the properties of the gauze. In addition to increasing the drying time and water holding abilities, liquid medicines were able to be absorbed by the microbial cellulose coated gauze, allowing them to work at the injury site.

Microbial cellulose has also been used for internal treatments, such as bone grafts and other tissue engineering and regeneration. A key ability of microbial cellulose for medical applications is that it can easily be molded into various shapes while still retaining all of its useful properties. By molding microbial cellulose into long, hollow tubes, they can be used as replacement structures for several different areas, such as the cardiovascular system, the digestive tract, urinary tract, or the trachea. A recent application of microbial cellulose has been as synthetic blood vessels and stents. The cellulose can also be modeled into mesh membranes that can be used for internal replacement structures, such as the brain's outer membrane, the dura mater. In addition to replacement, these structures have also been used as grafts to interact with existing internal biological material. Microbial cellulose has also been used in guided tissue regeneration. Bioprocess ® and Gengiflex ® are some of the common trademarked products of microbial cellulose that now have wide applications in surgery and dental implants. One example involves the recovery of periodontal tissues by separating oral epithelial cells and gingival connective tissues from the treated root surface.

An area of active research on microbial cellulose is in the area of electronic paper. Currently, plant cellulose is used to produce the bulk of traditional paper, but due to its low purity it must be mixed with other substances such as lignin. However, due to microbial cellulose's higher purity and microfibril structure, it may prove to be an excellent candidate for an electronic paper substrate. Microbial cellulose can be fashioned into sheets approximately 100 micrometers thick, about the thickness of normal paper, by a wet synthesis process. The microbial cellulose produces a sturdy substrate with a microfibril structure that allows the paper to be implanted with dopants. Through the application of solutions to the microbial cellulose paper, conductive dopants and electrochromic dyes can be placed into the microfibril structure. The bistable dyes change from clear to dark upon the application of the appropriate voltages, which when placed in a pixel structure, would allow images to be formed. This technology is still in the research stage and has not yet been scaled to commercial production levels. Further research has been done to apply bacterial cellulose as a substrate in electronic devices with the potential to be used as e-book tablets, e-newspapers, dynamic wall papers, rewritable maps and learning tools. Another possible example of bacterial cellulose use in the electronics industry includes the manufacture of organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs).

Due to the inefficient production process, the current price of bacterial cellulose remains too high to make it commercially attractive and viable on a large scale. Traditional production methods cannot produce microbial cellulose in commercial quantities, so further advancements with reactor based production must be achieved to be able to market many microbial cellulose products.



</doc>
<doc id="21975254" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21975254" title="L-form bacteria">
L-form bacteria

L-form bacteria, also known as L-phase bacteria, L-phase variants, and cell wall-deficient (CWD) bacteria, are strains of bacteria that lack cell walls. They were first isolated in 1935 by Emmy Klieneberger-Nobel, who named them "L-forms" after the Lister Institute in London where she was working.

Two types of L-forms are distinguished: "unstable L-forms", spheroplasts that are capable of dividing, but can revert to the original morphology, and "stable L-forms", L-forms that are unable to revert to the original bacteria.

Some parasitic species of bacteria, such as mycoplasma, also lack a cell wall, but these are not considered L-forms since they are not derived from bacteria that normally have cell walls.

Bacterial morphology is determined by the cell wall. Since the L-form has no cell wall, its morphology is different from that of the strain of bacteria from which it is derived. Typical L-form cells are spheres or spheroids. For example, L-forms of the rod-shaped bacterium "Bacillus subtilis" appear round when viewed by phase contrast microscopy or by transmission electron microscopy.

Although L-forms can develop from Gram-positive as well as from Gram-negative bacteria, in a Gram stain test, the L-forms always colour Gram-negative, due to the lack of a cell wall.

The cell wall is important for cell division, which, in most bacteria, occurs by binary fission. This process usually requires a cell wall and components of the bacterial cytoskeleton such as FtsZ. The ability of L-form bacteria to grow and divide in the absence of both of these structures is highly unusual, and may represent a form of cell division that was important in early forms of life. This novel mode of division seems to involve the extension of thin protrusions from the cell's surface and these protrusions then pinching off to form new cells. The lack of cell wall in L-forms means that division is disorganised, giving rise to a variety of cell sizes, from very tiny to very big.

L-forms can be generated in the laboratory from many bacterial species that usually have cell walls, such as "Bacillus subtilis" or "Escherichia coli". This is done by inhibiting peptidoglycan synthesis with antibiotics or treating the cells with lysozyme, an enzyme that digests cell walls. The L-forms are generated in a culture medium that is the same osmolarity as the bacterial cytosol (an isotonic solution), which prevents cell lysis by osmotic shock. L-form strains can be unstable, tending to revert to the normal form of the bacteria by regrowing a cell wall, but this can be prevented by long-term culture of the cells under the same conditions that were used to produce them – letting the wall-disabling mutations to accumulate by genetic drift.

Some studies have identified mutations that occur, as these strains are derived from normal bacteria. One such point mutation D92E is in an enzyme "yqiD"/"ispA" () involved in the mevalonate pathway of lipid metabolism that increased the frequency of L-form formation 1,000-fold. The reason for this effect is not known, but it is presumed that the increase is related to this enzyme's role in making a lipid important in peptidoglycan synthesis.

Another methodology of induction relies on nanotechnology and landscape ecology. Microfluidics devices can be built in order to challenge peptidoglycan synthesis by extreme spatial confinement. After biological dispersal through a constricted (sub-micrometre scale) biological corridor connecting adjacent micro habitat patches, L-form-like cells can be derived using a microfluifics-based (synthetic) ecosystem implementing an adaptive landscape selecting for shape-shifting phenotypes similar to L-forms.

Some publications have suggested that L-form bacteria might cause diseases in humans, and other animals but, as the evidence that links these organisms to disease is fragmentary and frequently contradictory, this hypothesis remains controversial. The two extreme viewpoints on this question are that L-form bacteria are either laboratory curiosities of no clinical significance or important but unappreciated causes of disease. Research on L-form bacteria is continuing. For example, L-form organisms have been observed in mouse lungs after experimental inoculation with "Nocardia caviae", and a recent study suggested that these organisms may infect immunosuppressed patients having undergone bone marrow transplants. The formation of strains of bacteria lacking cell walls has also been proposed to be important in the acquisition of bacterial antibiotic resistance.

L-form bacteria may be useful in research on early forms of life, and in biotechnology. These strains are being examined for possible uses in biotechnology as host strains for recombinant protein production. Here, the absence of a cell wall can allow production of large amounts of secreted proteins that would otherwise accumulate in the periplasmic space of bacteria.





</doc>
<doc id="11095814" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11095814" title="Prosthecate bacteria">
Prosthecate bacteria

Prosthecate bacteria are a non-phylogenetically related group of Gram-negative bacteria that possess appendages, termed "prosthecae". These cellular appendages are neither pili nor flagella, as they are extensions of the cellular membrane and contain cytosol. One notable group of prosthecates is the genus "Caulobacter".

Prosthecates are generally chemoorganotrophic aerobes that can grow in nutrient-poor habitats, being able to survive at nutrient levels on the order of parts-per-million for which reason they are often found in aquatic habitats. These bacteria will attach to surfaces with their prosthecae, allowing a greater surface area with which to take up nutrients (and release waste products). Some prosthecates will grow in nutrient-poor soils as aerobic heterotrophs.

"Caulobacter"<br>
Oligotrophic<br>
Flagella<br>
Pilus

Poindexter, Jeanne S. Dimorphic Prosthecate Bacteria: The Genera "Caulobacter", "Asticcacaulis", "Hyphomicrobium", "Pedomicrobium", "Hyphomonas" and "Thiodendron".


</doc>
<doc id="9880182" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9880182" title="Putrefying bacteria">
Putrefying bacteria

Putrefying bacteria are bacteria involved in putrefaction of living matter. Along with other decomposers, they play a critical role in recycling nitrogen from dead organisms.

Putrefying bacteria use amino acids or urea as an energy source to decompose dead organisms. In the process, they produce ammonium ions. Nitrifying bacteria then convert this ammonium into nitrate, which can then be used by plants to create more proteins thus completing the nitrogen cycle.



</doc>
<doc id="20134016" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=20134016" title="CoRR hypothesis">
CoRR hypothesis

The CoRR hypothesis states that the location of genetic information in cytoplasmic organelles permits regulation of its expression by the reduction-oxidation ("redox") state of its gene products.

CoRR is short for "co-location for redox regulation", itself a shortened form of "co-location (of gene and gene product) for (evolutionary) continuity of redox regulation of gene expression".
CoRR was put forward explicitly in 1993 in a paper in the "Journal of Theoretical Biology" with the title "Control of gene expression by redox potential and the requirement for chloroplast and mitochondrial genomes". The central concept had been outlined in a review of 1992. The term CoRR was introduced in 2003 in a paper in "Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society" entitled "The function of genomes in bioenergetic organelles".

Chloroplasts and mitochondria are energy-converting organelles in the cytoplasm of eukaryotic cells. Chloroplasts in plant cells perform photosynthesis; the capture and conversion of the energy of sunlight. Mitochondria in both plant and animal cells perform respiration; the release of this stored energy when work is done. In addition to these key reactions of bioenergetics, chloroplasts and mitochondria each contain specialized and discrete genetic systems. These genetic systems enable chloroplasts and mitochondria to make some of their own proteins.

Both the genetic and energy-converting systems of chloroplasts and mitochondria are descended, with little modification, from those of the free-living bacteria that these organelles once were. The existence of these cytoplasmic genomes is consistent with, and counts as evidence for, the endosymbiont hypothesis. Most genes for proteins of chloroplasts and mitochondria are, however, now located on chromosomes in the nuclei of eukaryotic cells. There they code for protein precursors that are made in the cytosol for subsequent import into the organelles.

CoRR seeks to explain why chloroplasts and mitochondria retain DNA, and thus why some characters are inherited through the cytoplasm in the phenomenon of cytoplasmic, non-Mendelian, uniparental, or maternal inheritance. CoRR does so by offering an answer to this question: why, in evolution, did some bacterial, endosymbiont genes move to the cell nucleus, while others did not?

CoRR states that chloroplasts and mitochondria contain those genes whose expression is required to be under the direct, regulatory control of the redox state of their gene products, or of electron carriers with which those gene products interact. Such genes comprise a core, or primary subset, of organellar genes. The requirement for redox control of each gene in the primary subset then confers an advantage upon location of that gene within the organelle. Natural selection therefore anchors some genes in organelles, while favouring location of others in the cell nucleus.

Chloroplast and mitochondrial genomes also contain genes for components of the chloroplast and mitochondrial genetic systems themselves. These genes comprise a secondary subset of organellar genes: genetic system genes. There is generally no requirement for redox control of expression of genetic system genes, though their being subject to redox control may, in some cases, allow amplification of redox signals acting upon genes in the primary subset (bioenergetic genes).

Retention of genes of the secondary subset (genetic system genes) is necessary for the operation of redox control of expression of genes in the primary subset. If all genes disappear from the primary subset, CoRR predicts that there is no function for genes in the secondary subset, and such organelles will then, eventually, lose their genomes completely. However, if even only one gene remains under redox control, then an organelle genetic system is required for the synthesis of its single gene product.




</doc>
<doc id="9955143" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9955143" title="Bacterial transcription">
Bacterial transcription

Bacterial transcription is the process in which a segment of bacterial DNA is copied into a newly synthesized strand of messenger RNA (mRNA) with use of the enzyme RNA polymerase. The process occurs in three main steps: initiation, elongation, and termination; and the end result is a strand of mRNA that is complementary to a single strand of DNA. Generally, the transcribed region accounts for more than one gene. In fact, many prokaryotic genes occur in operons, which are a series of genes that work together to code for the same protein or gene product and are controlled by a single promoter. Prokaryotic RNA polymerase is made up of four subunits and when a fifth subunit attaches, called the σ-factor, the polymerase can recognize specific binding sequences in the DNA, called promoters. The binding of the σ-factor to the promoter is the first step in initiation. Once the σ-factor releases from the polymerase, elongation proceeds. The polymerase continues down the double stranded DNA, unwinding it and synthesizing the new mRNA strand until it reaches a termination site. There are two termination mechanisms that are discussed in further detail below. Termination is required at specific sites for proper gene expression to occur. Gene expression determines how much gene product, such as protein, is made by the gene. Transcription is carried out by RNA polymerase but its specificity is controlled by sequence-specific DNA binding proteins called transcription factors. Transcription factors work to recognize specific DNA sequences and based on the cells needs, promote or inhibit additional transcription.

Prokaryotic transcription differs from eukaryotic transcription in several ways. In prokaryotes, transcription and translation can occur simultaneously in the cytoplasm of the cell, whereas in eukaryotes transcription occurs in the nucleus and translation occurs in the cytoplasm. There is only one type of prokaryotic RNA polymerase whereas eukaryotes have 3 types. Prokaryotes have a σ-factor that detects and binds to promoter sites but eukaryotes do not need a σ-factor. Instead, eukaryotes have transcription factors that allow the recognition and binding of promoter sites.

Overall, transcription within bacteria is a highly regulated process that is controlled by the integration of many signals at a given time. Bacteria heavily rely on transcription and translation to generate proteins that help them respond specifically to their environment.

RNA polymerase is composed of a core and a holoenzyme structure. The core enzymes contains the catalytic properties of RNA polymerase and is made up of ββ′α2ω subunits. This sequence is conserved across all bacterial species. The holoenzyme is composed of a specific component known as the sigma factor. The sigma factor functions in aiding in promoter recognition, correct placement of RNA polymerase, and beginning unwinding at the start site. After the sigma factor performs its required function, it dissociates, while the catalytic portion remains on the DNA and continues transcription. Additionally, RNA polymerase contains a core Mg+ ion that assists the enzyme with its catalytic properties. RNA polymerase works by catalyzing the nucleophilic attack of 3’ OH of RNA to the alpha phosphate of a complementary NTP molecule to create a growing strand of RNA from the template strand of DNA. Furthermore, RNA polymerase also displays exonuclease activities, meaning that if improper base pairing is detected, it can cut out the incorrect bases and replace them with the proper, correct one.

Initiation of transcription requires promoter regions, which are specific nucleotide consensus sequences that tell the σ-factor on RNA polymerase where to bind to the DNA. The promoters are usually located 15 to 19 bases apart and are most commonly found upstream of the genes they control. RNA polymerase is made up of 4 subunits, which include two alphas, a beta, and a beta prime (α, α, β, and β'). A fifth subunit, sigma (called the σ-factor), is only present during initiation and detaches prior to elongation. Each subunit plays a role in the initiation of transcription, and the σ-factor "must" be present for initiation to occur. When all σ-factor is present, RNA polymerase is in its active form and is referred to as the holoenzyme. When the σ-factor detaches, it is in core polymerase form. The σ-factor recognizes promoter sequences at -35 and -10 regions and transcription begins at the start site (+1). The sequence of the -10 region is TATAAT and the sequence of the -35 region is TTGACA.

The promoter region is a prime regulator of transcription. Promoter regions regulate transcription of all genes within bacteria. As a result of their involvement, the sequence of base pairs within the promoter region is significant; the more similar the promoter region is to the consensus sequence, the tighter RNA polymerase will be able to bind. This binding contributes to the stability of elongation stage of transcription and overall results in more efficient functioning. Additionally, RNA polymerase and σ-factors are in limited supply within any given bacterial cell. Consequently, σ-factor binding to the promoter is affected by these limitations. All promoter regions contain sequences that are considered non-consensus and this helps to distribute σ-factors across the entirety of the genome.

During elongation, RNA polymerase slides down the double stranded DNA, unwinding it and transcribing (copying) its nucleotide sequence into newly synthesized RNA. The movement of the RNA-DNA complex is essential for the catalytic mechanism of RNA polymerase. Additionally, RNA polymerase increases the overall stability of this process by acting as a link between the RNA and DNA strands. New nucleotides that are complementary to the DNA template strand are added to the 3' end of the RNA strand. The newly formed RNA strand is "practically" identical to the DNA coding strand (sense strand or non-template strand), except it has uracil substituting thymine, and a ribose sugar backbone instead of a deoxyribose sugar backbone. Because nucleoside triphosphates (NTPs) need to attach to the OH- molecule on the 3' end of the RNA, transcription always occurs in the 5' to 3' direction. The four NTPs are adenosine-5'-triphosphate (ATP), guanoside-5'-triphosphate (GTP), uridine-5'-triphosphate (UTP), and cytidine-5'-triphosphate (CTP). The attachment of NTPs onto the 3' end of the RNA transcript provides the energy required for this synthesis. NTPs are also energy producing molecules that provide the fuel that drives chemical reactions in the cell.

Multiple RNA polymerases can be active at once, meaning many strands of mRNA can be produced very quickly. RNA polymerase moves down the DNA rapidly at approximately 40 bases per second. Due to the quick nature of this process, DNA is continually unwound ahead of RNA polymerase and then rewound once RNA polymerase moves along further. The polymerase has a proofreading mechanism that limits mistakes to about 1 in 10,000 nucleotides transcribed. RNA polymerase has lower fidelity (accuracy) and speed than DNA polymerase. DNA polymerase has a very different proofreading mechanism that includes exonuclease activity, which contributes to the higher fidelity. The consequence of an error during RNA synthesis is usually harmless, where as an error in DNA synthesis could be detrimental.

The promoter sequence determines the frequency of transcription of its corresponding gene.

In order for proper gene expression to occur, transcription must stop at specific sites. Two termination mechanisms are well known:


The termination of DNA transcription in bacteria may be stopped by certain mechanisms wherein the RNA polymerase will ignore the terminator sequence until the next one is reached. This phenomenon is known as antitermination and is utilized by certain bacteriophages.



</doc>
<doc id="1647936" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1647936" title="Luria–Delbrück experiment">
Luria–Delbrück experiment

The Luria–Delbrück experiment (1943) (also called the Fluctuation Test) demonstrates that in bacteria, genetic mutations arise in the absence of selection, rather than being a response to selection. Therefore, Darwin's theory of natural selection acting on random mutations applies to bacteria as well as to more complex organisms. Max Delbrück and Salvador Luria won the 1969 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in part for this work.

By the 1940s the ideas of inheritance and mutation were generally accepted, though the role of DNA as the hereditary material had not yet been established. It was thought that bacteria were somehow different and could develop heritable genetic mutations depending on the circumstances they found themselves: in short, was the mutation in bacteria pre-adaptive (pre-existent) or post-adaptive (directed adaption) ? Luria in particular was obsessed with this idea and was determined to test it. He conceived the experiment at a faculty dance at Indiana University while watching a slot machine.

In their experiment, Luria and Delbrück inoculated a small number of bacteria ("Escherichia coli") into separate culture tubes. After a period of growth, they plated equal volumes of these separate cultures onto agar containing the T1 phage (virus). If resistance to the virus in bacteria were caused by an induced activation in bacteria i.e. if resistance were not due to heritable genetic components, then each plate should contain roughly the same number of resistant colonies. 
Assuming a constant rate of mutation, Luria hypothesized that if mutations occurred after and in response to exposure to the selective agent, the number of survivors would be distributed according to a Poisson distribution with the mean equal to the variance. This was not what Delbrück and Luria found: Instead the number of resistant colonies on each plate varied drastically: the variance was considerably greater than the mean.

Luria and Delbrück proposed that these results could be explained by the occurrence of a constant rate of random mutations in each generation of bacteria growing in the initial culture tubes. Based on these assumptions Delbrück derived a probability distribution (now called the Luria–Delbrück distribution) that gives a relationship between moments consistent with the experimentally obtained values. The distribution that follows from the directed adaptation hypothesis (the Poisson distribution) predicted moments inconsistent with the data. Therefore, the conclusion was that mutations in bacteria, as in other organisms, are random rather than directed.

The results of Luria and Delbrück were confirmed in more graphical, but less quantitative, way by Newcombe. Newcombe incubated bacteria in a Petri dish for a few hours, then replica plated it onto two new Petri dishes treated with phage. The first plate was left unspread, and the second plate was then respread, that is, bacterial cells were moved around allowing single cells in some colony to form their own new colonies. If colonies contained resistant bacterial cells before entering into contact with the phage virus, one would expect that some of these cells would form new resistant colonies on the respread dish and so to find a higher number of surviving bacteria there. When both plates were incubated for growth, there were actually as much as 50 times greater number of bacterial colonies on the respread dish. This showed that bacterial mutations to virus resistance had randomly occurred during the first incubation. Once again, the mutations occurred before selection was applied.

More recently, the results of Luria and Delbrück were questioned by Cairns and others, who studied mutations in sugar metabolism as a form of environmental stress. Some scientists suggest that this result may have been caused by selection for gene amplification and/or a higher mutation rate in cells unable to divide. Others have defended the research and propose mechanisms which account for the observed phenomena consistent with adaptive mutagenesis.

This distribution appears to have been first determined by Haldane. An unpublished manuscript was discovered in 1991 at University College London describing this distribution. The derivation is different but the results are difficult to compute without the use of a computer.

A small number of cells are used to inoculate parallel cultures in a non-selective medium. The cultures are grown to saturation to obtain equal cell densities. The cells are plated onto selective media to obtain the number of mutants ("r"). Dilutions are plated onto rich medium to calculate the total number of viable cells ( "N" ). The number of mutants that appear in the saturated culture is a measure of both the mutation rate and when the mutants arise during the growth of the culture: mutants appearing early in the growth of the culture will propagate many more mutants than those that arise later during growth. These factors cause the frequency ( "r" / "N" ) to vary greatly, even if the number of mutational events ( "m" ) is the same. Frequency is not a sufficiently accurate measure of mutation and the mutation rate ("m" / "N") should always be calculated.

The estimation of the mutation rate ("m") is complex. Luria and Delbruck estimated this parameter from the mean of the distribution but this estimator was subsequently shown to be biased. The method of the median was introduced in 1949. This method is based on the equation

This method has since been improved on but these more accurate methods are complex. The Ma-Sandri-Sarkar maximum likelihood estimator is currently the best known estimator. A number of additional methods and estimates from experimental data have been described.

Two web-applications for the calculation of the mutation rate are freely available: Falcor and bz-rates. Bz-rates implements a generalized version of the Ma-Sandri-Sarkar maximum likelihood estimator that can take into account the relative differential growth rate between mutant and wild-type cells as well as a generating function estimator that can estimate both the mutation rate and the differential growth rate. A worked example is shown in this paper by Jones "et al".

In all these models the mutation rate ("μ") and growth rate ("β") were assumed to be constant. The model can be easily generalized to relax these and other constraints. These rates are likely to differ in non experimental settings. The models also require that "N" "m" » 0 where "N" is the total number of organisms. This assumption is likely to hold in most realistic or experimental settings.

Luria and Delbrück estimated the mutation rate from the equation

where "β" is the cellular growth rate, "n" is the initial number of bacteria in each culture, "t" is the time, and

where "N" is the number of cultures without resistant bacteria and "N" is the total number of cultures.

Lea and Coulson's model differed from the original in that they considered a collection of independent Yule processes (a filtered Poisson process). Numerical comparisons of these two models with realistic values of the parameters has shown that they differ only slightly. The generating function for this model was found by Bartlett in 1978 and is

where "μ" is the mutation rate (assumed to be constant), with "β" as the cellular growth rate (also assumed to be constant) and "t" as the time.

The determination of "μ" from this equation has proved difficult but a solution was discovered in 2005. Differentiation of the generating function with respect to "μ" allows the application of the Newton–Raphson method which together with the use of a score function allows one to obtain confidence intervals for "μ".

The mechanism of resistance to the phage T1 appears to have been due to mutations in the "fhu"A gene - a membrane protein that acts as the T1 receptor. The "ton"B gene product is also required for infection by T1. The FhuA protein is actively involved in the transport of ferrichrome, albomycin and rifamycin. It also confers sensitivity to microcin J25 and colicin M and acts as a receptor for the phages T5 and phi80 as well as T1.

The FhuA protein has a beta-barrel domain (residues 161 to 714) that is closed by a globular cork domain (residues 1 to 160). Within the cork domain is the TonB binding region (residues 7 to 11). The large membrane spanning monomeric β-barrel domains have 22 β-strands of variable length, several of which extend significantly beyond the membrane hydrophobic core into the extracellular space. There are 11 extracellular loops numbered L1 to L11. The L4 loop is where the T1 phage binds.



</doc>
<doc id="21734002" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=21734002" title="Eurybacteria">
Eurybacteria

Eurybacteria is a taxon created by Cavalier-Smith, which includes several groups of Gram-negative bacteria. In this model, it is the ancestor of gram positive bacteria. Their endospores are characterized by producing and presenting external flagella or mobility by bacterial displacement.

Specifically, it includes:


In the standard classification, selenobacteria are usually included in the phylum firmicutes, whereas fusobacteria and togobacteria are classified as their own groups.

The following graph shows Cavalier-Smith's version of the tree of life, indicating the status of eurybacteria.


</doc>
<doc id="2686262" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2686262" title="Piezophile">
Piezophile

A piezophile (from Greek "piezo-" for pressure and "-phile" for loving) is an organism with optimal growth under high hydrostatic pressure or, more operationally, an organism that have its maximum rate of growth at a hydrostatic pressure equal or above 10 MPa (= 99 atm = 1,450 psi), when tested over all permissible temperatures. Originally, the term barophile was used for these organisms, but since the prefix "baro-" stands for weight, the term piezophile should be given preference. Like all definitions of extremophiles, the definition of piezophiles is anthropocentric, and humans consider that moderate values for hydrostatic pressure are those around 1 atm (= 0.1 MPa = 14.7 psi). Hyperpiezophile is defined as an organism that have their maximum rate of growth above 50 MPa (= 493 atm = 7,252 psi).

The current record for highest hydrostatic pressure where growth was observed is 130 MPa (= 1,283 atm = 18,855 psi), by the archaea "Thermococcus piezophilus". Obligate piezophiles refers to organisms that are unable to grow under lower hydrostatic pressures, such as 0.1 MPa. In contrast, piezotolerant organisms are those that have their maximum rate of growth at a hydrostatic pressure under 10 MPa, but that nevertheless are able to grow at lower rates under higher hydrostatic pressures.

Most of the Earth's biosphere (in terms of volume) is subject to high hydrostatic pressure, and the piezosphere comprises the deep sea (at the depth of 1,000 m and greater) plus the deep subsurface (which can extend up to 5,000 m beneath the seafloor or the continental surface). The deep sea has a mean temperature around 1 to 3 °C, and it is dominated by psychrothermophiles, in contrast to the deep subsurface and hydrothermal vents in the seafloor, which are dominated by thermopiezophiles that prosper on temperatures above 45 °C (113 °F).

The high pressures experienced by these organisms can cause the normal fluid cell membrane to become waxy and relatively impermeable to nutrients. The high pressure decreases the ability of the subunits of multimeric proteins to interact. Thus, large protein complexes must interact to decrease pressure-related effects and regulate processes such as protein and DNA synthesis, which are sensitive to high pressure. Piezophilic bacteria have a high proportion of fatty acids in their cytoplasmic membrane, which allows membranes to remain functional and keep from gelling at high pressures.



</doc>
<doc id="33821697" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33821697" title="'The All-Species Living Tree' Project">
'The All-Species Living Tree' Project

'The All-Species Living Tree' Project is a collaboration between various academic groups/institutes, such as ARB, SILVA rRNA database project, and LPSN, with the aim of assembling a database of 16S rRNA sequences of all validly published species of "Bacteria" and "Archaea". At one stage, 23S sequences were also collected, but this has since stopped.

Currently there are over 10,950 species in the aligned dataset and several more are being added either as new species are discovered or species that are not represented in the database are sequenced. Initially the latter group consisted of 7% of species.

Similar (and more recent) projects include the Genomic Encyclopedia of Bacteria and Archaea (GEBA), which focused on whole genome sequencing of bacteria and archaea.

The tree was created by maximum likelihood analysis without bootstrap: consequently accuracy is traded off for size and many phylum level clades are not correctly resolved (such as the Firmicutes). (Eukaryotes not present in analysis). This 16S rRNA-based phylogenetic tree is based on the ARB-SILVA release LTPs 121 (June 2015) and contains all type species with validly published names up to December 2014.


</doc>
<doc id="40978245" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=40978245" title="Metallogenium">
Metallogenium

Metallogenium is a proposed genus of bacteria that has an affinity to form star-shaped manganese oxide minerals. The organism is supposedly observed in limnic environments. The species is currently not assigned to any taxonomic family.



</doc>
<doc id="2313403" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2313403" title="Hopanoids">
Hopanoids

Hopanoids are a diverse subclass of triterpenoids with the same hydrocarbon skeleton as the compound hopane. This group of pentacyclic molecules therefore refers to simple hopenes, hopanols and hopanes, but also to extensively functionalized derivatives such as bacteriohopanepolyols (BHP) and hopanoids covalently attached to lipid A.

The first known hopanoid, hydroxyhopanone, was isolated by two chemists at The National Gallery, London working on the chemistry of dammar gum, a natural resin used as a varnish for paintings. The name hopane was derived from the genus Hopea (a source of the resin), which in turn was named after the botanist John Hope. Since this first finding in an angiosperm, however, hopanoids have been found in membranes of bacteria, lichens, bryophytes, ferns and fungi. Because of their geostable structures, various hopanoids are preserved in petroleum reservoirs, rocks and sediment, allowing them to be used as biological markers. Hopanoids have not been detected in archaea.

About 10% of sequenced bacterial genomes have a putative "shc" gene encoding a squalene-hopene cyclase and can presumably make hopanoids, which have been shown to play diverse roles in the plasma membrane and may allow some organisms to adapt in extreme environments.

Since hopanoids modify plasma membrane properties in bacteria, they are frequently compared to sterols, such as cholesterol, which modulate membrane fluidity and serve other functions in eukaryotes. Although hopanoids do not seem to rescue sterol deficiency, they do condense membranes and decrease permeability. Also, gammaproteobacteria and eukaryotic organisms such as lichens and bryophytes have been shown to produce both sterols and hopanoids, suggesting these lipids may have other distinct functions. Notably, the way hopanoids pack into the plasma membrane can change depending on what functional groups are attached. The hopanoid bacteriohopanetetrol assumes a transverse orientation in lipid bilayers, but diploptene localizes between the inner and outer leaflet, presumably thickening the membrane to decrease permeability.

The hopanoid diplopterol orders membranes by interacting with lipid A, a common membrane lipid in bacteria, in ways similar to how cholesterol and sphingolipids interact in eukaryotic plasma membranes. Diplopterol and cholesterol were demonstrated to promote condensation and inhibit gel-phase formation in both sphingomyelin monolayers and monolayers of glycan-modified lipid A. Furthermore, both diplopterol and cholesterol could rescue pH-dependent phase transitions in glycan-modified lipid A monolayers. The role of hopanoids in membrane-mediated acid tolerance is further supported by observations of acid-inhibited growth and morphological abnormalities of the plasma membrane in hopanoid-deficient bacteria with mutant squalene-hopene cyclases.

Hopanoids are produced in several nitrogen-fixing bacteria. In the actinomycete Frankia, hopanoids in diazovesicle membranes likely restrict the entry of oxygen by making the lipid bilayer more tight and compact. In "Bradyrhizobium", hopanoids chemically bonded to lipid A increase membrane stability and rigidity, enhancing stress tolerance and intracellular survival in Aeschynomene legumes. In the cyanobacterium "Nostoc punctiforme", large quantities of 2-methylhopanoids localize to the outer membranes of survival structures called akinetes. In another example of stress tolerance, hopanoids in the aerial hyphae (spore bearing structures) of the prokaryotic soil bacteria Streptomyces are thought to minimize water loss across the membrane to the air.

Since hopanoids are a C₃₀ terpenoid, biosynthesis begins with isopentenyl pyrophosphate (IPP) and dimethylallyl pyrophosphate (DMAP), which are combined to form longer chain isoprenoids. Synthesis of these smaller precursors proceeds either via the mevalonate pathway or the methylerythritol-4-phosphate pathway depending on the bacterial species, although the latter tends to be more common. DMAP condenses with one molecule of IPP to geranyl pyrophosphate, which in turn condenses with another IPP to generate farnesyl pyrophosphate. Squalene synthase, coded for by the gene "sqs", then catalyzes the condensation of two farnesyl pyrophosphate molecules to squalene while oxidizing NADPH.

Next, a squalene-hopene cyclase catalyzes an elaborate cyclization reaction, engaging squalene in an energetically favorable all-chair conformation before creating 5 cycles, 6 covalent bonds, and 9 chiral centers on the molecule in a single step. This enzyme, coded for by the gene "shc," has a double ⍺-barrel fold characteristic of terpenoid biosynthesis and is present in the cell as a monotopic homodimer, meaning pairs of the cyclase are embedded in but do not span the plasma membrane. "In vitro", this enzyme exhibits promiscuous substrate specificity, also cyclizing 2,3-oxidosqualene.

Aromatic residues in the active site form several unfavorable carbocations on the substrate which are quenched by a rapid polycyclization. In the last substep of the cyclization reaction, after electrons comprising the terminal alkene bond on the squalene have attacked the hopenyl carbocation to close the E ring, the C-22 carbocation may be quenched by mechanisms that lead to different hopanoid products. Nucleophilic attack of water will yield diplopterol, while deprotonation at an adjacent carbon will form one of several hopene isomers, often diploptene.

After cyclization, hopanoids are frequently modified by hopanoid biosynthesis enzymes encoded by genes in the same operon as "shc", "hpn". For instance, the radical SAM protein HpnH adds an adenosine group to diploptene, forming the extended C35 hopanoid adenosylhopane, which can then be further modified by other "hpn" gene products to form bacteriohopanetetrol (BHT). Additional modification occurs as the glycosyltransferase HpnI converts BHT to N-acetylglucosaminyl-BHT. In sequence, the hopanoid biosynthesis associated protein HpnK mediates deacetylation to glucosaminyl-BHT, from which radical SAM protein HpnJ generates a cyclitol ether.

Importantly, C30 and C35 hopanoids alike may be methylated at C-2 and C-3 positions by the radical SAM methyltransferases HpnP and HpnR, respectively. These two methylations are particularly geostable compared to side-chain modifications and have entertained geobiologists for decades.

In a biosynthetic pathway exclusive to some bacteria, diploptene is a precursor for the pentacyclic triterpenoid tetrahymanol, which instead is produced directly from squalene by a cyclase in eukaryotes.

Hopanoids have been estimated to be the most abundant natural products on Earth, remaining in the organic fraction of all sediments, independent of age, origin or nature. Biomolecules like DNA and proteins are degraded during diagenesis, but polycyclic lipids persist in the environment over geologic timescales due to their fused, stable structures. Although hopanoids and sterols are reduced to hopanes and steranes during deposition, these diagenetic products can still be useful biomarkers, or molecular fossils, for studying the coevolution of early life and Earth.

2-methylhopanes supposedly from photosynthetic cyanobacteria and steranes were reported by Roger Summons and colleagues as molecular fossils preserved in 2.7 Gya shales from the Pilbara region in Western Australia. The presence of abundant 2-alpha-methylhopanes preserved in these shales was interpreted as evidence of oxygenic photosynthesis at least 2.7 Gya, unexpectedly suggesting a 400 million year gap between the evolution of oxygenic metabolism and when atmosphere became oxidizing. This interpretation of the biomarker record was challenged when "Geobacter sulfurreducens" was demonstrated to synthesize diverse hopanols, although not 2-methyl-hopanols, when grown under strictly anaerobic conditions. The integrity of 2-methylhopanes as biomarkers for oxygenic photosynthesis was then further attenuated by evidence that the phototroph "Rhodopseudomonas palustris" produced 2-methyl-BHPs only under anoxic conditions. Concrete evidence came from studies showing that not all cyanobacteria make hopanoids and that genes coding for the methyltransferase HpnP are present in nonphotosynthetic alphaproteobacteria and acidobacteria.

Biomarker findings in the Pilbara-Craton shales were later rejected altogether during more recent evaluations of the fossil triterpenoid record. Currently, the oldest detected triterpenoid fossils are Mesoproterozoic okenanes, steranes, and methylhopanes from a 1.64 Gya basin in Australia. However, molecular clock analyses estimate that the earliest sterols were likely produced around 2.3 Gya, around the same time as the Great Oxidation Event, with hopanoid synthesis arising even earlier.

For several reasons, hopanoids and squalene-hopene cyclases have been hypothesized to be more ancient than sterols and oxidosqualene cyclases. First, diplopterol is formed from water quenching the C-22 carbocation, meaning it can be made without molecular oxygen and could have served as a sterol surrogate before Earth's atmosphere became oxic. Furthermore, squalene binds to squalene-hopene cyclases in a low-energy, all-chair conformation while oxidosqualene is cyclized in a more strained, chair-boat-chair-boat conformation. Squalene-hopene cyclases also display more substrate promiscuity in that they cyclize oxidosqualene "in vitro", causing some scientists to hypothesize that they are evolutionary predecessors to oxidosqualene cyclases. Other scientists have proposed that squalene-hopene and oxidosqualene cyclases diverged from a common ancestor, a putative bacterial cyclase that would have made a tricyclic malabaricanoid or tetracyclic dammarinoid product.

The elegant mechanism behind the protonase activity of squalene-hopene cyclase was appreciated and adapted by chemical engineers at the University of Stuttgart, Germany. Active site engineering resulted in loss of the enzyme's ability to form hopanoids, but enabled Brønsted acid catalysis for the stereoselective cyclization of the monoterpenoids geraniol, epoxygeraniol, and citronellal.

The application of hopanoids and hopanoid-producing nitrogen fixers has been proposed and patented as a biofertilizer technique that increases environmental resistance of plant-associated microbial symbionts.

During later studies of interactions between diplopterol and lipid A in "Methylobacterium extorquens", multidrug transport was found to be a hopanoid-dependent process. Squalene-hopene cyclase mutants derived from a wild type capable of multidrug efflux, a drug-resistance mechanism mediated by integral transport proteins, lost the ability to perform both multidrug transport and hopanoid synthesis. Researchers indicate this could be due to direct regulation of transport proteins by hopanoids or indirectly by altering membrane ordering in a way that disrupts the transport system.


</doc>
<doc id="41479084" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=41479084" title="Altered Schaedler flora">
Altered Schaedler flora

The altered Schaedler flora (ASF) is a community of eight bacterial species: two Lactobacilli, one Bacteroides, one spiral bacteria of the Flexistipes genus, and four extremely oxygen sensitive (EOS) Fusobacterium species. The bacteria are selected for their dominance and persistence in the normal microflora of mice, and for their ability to be isolated and grown in laboratory settings. Germ-free animals, mainly mice, are infected with ASF for the purpose of studying the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Intestinal commensal bacteria play an important role in affecting gene expression of the GI tract, immune responses, nutrient absorption, and pathogen resistance. The standardized microbial cocktail enabled the controlled study of microbe and host interactions, role of microbes, pathogen effects, and intestinal immunity and disease association, such as cancer, inflammatory bowel disease, diabetes, and other inflammatory or autoimmune diseases. Also, compared to germfree animals, ASF mice have fully developed immune system, resistance to opportunistic pathogens, and normal GI function and health, and are a great representation of normal mice.

The GI tract is particularly difficult to study due to its complex host-pathogen interaction. With 10-10 bacteria, 400-plus species, and variations between individuals, there are many complications in the study of a normal gastrointestinal system. For example, it is problematic to assign biological function to specific microbes and community structure, and to investigate the respective immune responses. Furthermore, the varying mice microbiome need to be under controlled conditions for repetitions of the experiments. Germfree mice and specific pathogen free (SPF) mice are helpful in addressing some of the issues, but inadequate in many areas. Germfree mice are not a good representation of normal mice, with issues of enlarged cecum, low reproductive rates, poorly developed immune system, and reduced health. SPF mice still contain varying microbiota, just without certain known pathogen species. There is a need in the scientific field for a known bacterial mixture that is necessary and sufficient for healthy mice.

In the mid-1960s, Russell W. Schaedler isolated and grew bacteria from normal and SPF mice. Aerobic and less oxygen-sensitive anaerobic bacteria are easy to culture. Fusiform and EOS bacteria are difficult to culture, even though they represent the majority of the normal rodent microbiota. He selected for the bacteria that dominated and can be isolated in culture, and then colonized germfree mice with different bacteria combinations. For example, one combination could include "Escherichia coli, Streptococcus fecalis, Lactobacillus acidophilus, L. salivarius, Bacteroides distasonis, Clostridium spp.", and some anaerobic fusiform bacteria. Certain defined microflora are able to restore germfree mice to resemble normal mice with reduced cecal volume, restored reproductive ability, colonization resistance, and well developed immune system. So named Schaedler flora, the defined microflora combinations was widely used in gnotobiotic studies.

In 1978, the National Cancer Institute revised and standardized the Schaedler flora, with the help of Roger Orcutt. In what was named altered Schaedler flora, four bacteria of the original mixture were kept: the two Lactobacilli, the Bacteroides, and the EOS fusiform bacterium. Four more bacteria from the microbiome isolates were added: a spirochete bacterium and three new EOS fusiform bacteria. Due to the limited technology of the time, not much was known of the specific bacterial genus and species. These bacteria are persistent and dominant in normal and SPF mice GI tract. Confirmation of the correct microbiota presence was limited to looking at the cell Morphology (biology), biochemical traits and growth characteristics 
With the recent advancement in biotechnology, researchers were able to determine the precise genus and species of the ASF bacteria using sequence analysis of 16S rRNA. The strains identified are different from the presumptive identities. The distribution of the bacteria species in the gut depends on their need of and aversion to oxygen, flow rate, and substrate abundance, with variability based on age, gender and other pathogens present in the mice.
ASF 360 and ASF 361 are Lactobacilli. Lactobacilli are filamentous, Gram-positive, aerotolerant bacteria, and common colonizers of the GI mucosa and squamous epithelia of mice. ASF 360 was thought to be "L. acidophilus". However, 16SrRNA results showed that it is closely related to but distinct from "L. acidophilus". ASF 360 is a novel lactobacillus species; clustered with "L. acidophilus" and "L. lactis". ASF 361 has nearly identical 16S rRNA sequences to "L. murinus" and "L. animalis". Both species are routinely found in GI tracts of mice and rats. A thorough examination of the two species and strains is necessary to determine the identity of ASF 361 with more confidence. ASF 361 is completely distinct from the "L. salivarius" that it was believed to be. ASF 360 and ASF 361 colonize in high numbers in the esophagus, the stomach, the small intestine, and the cecum due to their aerotolerance.

ASF 519 is related to "B. distasonis", the species it was mistaken to be. However, like the previous bacteria, it is a distinct species by 16S rRNA evidence. Bacteroides species are often found in GI tracts of mammals, and included non-motile, Gram-negative, anaerobic, rod-shaped bacteria. Recently, many of Bacteroides species are being recognized as actually belonging to other genera, like Porphyromonas and Prevotella. In the case of ASF 519, it belongs to the newly named Parabacteroides genus, along with the bacteria formerly known as "[B.] distasonis, [B.] merdae", CDC group DF-3, and "[B.] forsythus".

The spiral-shaped obligate anaerobe ASF 457 can be found in small amounts in the small intestine, and in high concentration in the large intestine. This bacterium is related to "G. ferrireducens, Deferribacter thermophilus", and "Flexistipes sinusarabici". ASF 457 is later named "Mucispirillum schaedleri". The species is related to the Flexistipes phylum with iron-reducing environmental isolates.

EOS fusiform bacteria make up the majority of the intestinal microbiota, and are mainly found in the large intestine. They vastly outnumber facultative anaerobic and aerobic bacteria. All four fusiform belong to the low G+C content, Gram-positive bacteria group. ASF 356 is of the Clostridium species, closely related to "Clostridium propionicum". ASF 502 is most related to "Ruminococcus gnavus". ASF 492 is confirmed by 16S rRNA sequences as "Eubacterium pexicaudatum", and is closely related to "Roseburia ceciola". ASF 356, ASF 492, and ASF 502 are all part of the low G+C, Gram-positive bacteria of the Clostridium cluster XIV. ASF 500 is a deeper branch into the low G+C, Gram-positive bacteria of Firmicutes, Bacillus-Clostridium group, but not much can be found in the GenBank database on this branch of Clostridium cluster 

Only mice have been colonized with ASF in experiments, since ASF bacteria originate from mice intestinal microbiome. Germfree mice are colonized by ASF through one of two methods. Pure culture of each living ASF bacteria can be grown in anaerobic conditions in laboratory setting. Lactobacilli and Bacteroides are given by gavage to germfree mice first to establish a microbial environment in the GI tract, which then supports the colonization of the spirochete and fusiform bacteria that are given later. An alternative way is to inoculate the drinking water of germfree mice with fresh feces from cecum and colon of gnotobiotic mice (ASF mice), over a period of four days. The establishment and concentration of each bacteria species vary slightly depending on the age, gender, and environmental conditions of the mice.

Experimental results validate the dominance and persistence of the ASF in the colonized mice even after four generations. The mice can be treated in the same standards as germfree mice, such as sterilized water, germfree environment, and careful handling. Although this ensures the definite ASF propagation in mice intestine, it is labor-intensive and not a good representation of physiological conditions. ASF mice can also be raised in the same conditions as normal mice, because they have addressed the immunological, pathological, and physiological weaknesses of the germfree mice. ASF mice can maintain the eight bacteria species under normal conditions. However, variations in strains of the bacteria and introduction of minor amounts of other commensal or pathogen could occur over time. Isogenic mice that cohabit showed little variation in ASF profile, while litter split among different cages showed divergence in bacteria strains. Once the ASF community are established though, it is highly stable over time without environmental or housing perturbation

ASF can be used to study a variety of activities involving the intestinal tract. This includes the study of gut microbiome community, metabolism, immunity, homeostasis, pathogenesis, inflammation, and diseases. Experiments comparing germfree, ASF, and pathogen-infected mice can demonstrate the role of commensals in maintaining the host health.

Intestinal homeostasis is maintained by host-microbe interactions and host immunity. This is critical for digestion of food and protection against pathogens. Bouskra, "et al." studied the regulation of intestinal flora and the immune system. They found IgA producing B cells in the Peyer's patches, intestinal lymphoid tissues and follicles, and mesenteric lymph nodes. They used ASF to test the maturation of lymphoid follicles into large B cell clusters by the toll-like receptor signaling. In another study, the innate detection system generates adaptive immune system to maintain intestinal homeostasis. Geuking, "et al." examined the role of regulatory T cells in limiting microbe-triggered intestinal inflammation and the T cell compartment. Using ASF, they found intestinal colonization resulted in activation and generation of colonic Treg cells. In germfree mice, Th17 and Th1 response dominate.

Bacteria microenvironment is very important in the pathogenesis of clinical and experimental chronic intestinal inflammation. Whary, "et al." examined Helicobacter rodentium infection and the resulting ulcerative typhlocolitis, sepsis, and morbidity. Using ASF mice, they showed a decrease in disease progression due to colonization resistance in the lower bowel from the impacts of normal anaerobic flora. In another summary, Fox examined the relationship between microbiome of the gut and the onset of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) with the infection of "H. bilis. H. bilis" is noted to elicit heterologous immune response to lower gut flora, in both activating pro-inflammatory cytokine and dendritic cell activity and probiotic anti-inflammatory activity due to the presentation of commensal antigens. ASF Lactobacilli and Bacteroides help moderate bowel inflammation in a balanced manner in pathogen infection studies.
Beyond the study of bacterial pathogen, microflora community, intestinal immune system interactions and diseases, ASF has been used in experiments examining the transmission of retrovirus. In the paper by Kane, "et al.", they found the mouse mammary tumor virus is transmitted most efficiently through bacteria colonized mucosal surfaces. The retrovirus evolved to rely on the interaction with microbiota and toll-like receptor to evade immune pathways.
ASF is not a comprehensive representation of the over 400 diverse bacteria species that normally occupy the mice GI tract. Even in SPF mice, there are many Helicobacter and Filamentous species not included in ASF1. Not to mention the many bacteria that could not be cultured under laboratory settings due to inadequate environment and symbiosis needs. The gut bacteria make up a complex microbial community that supports each other, and the development of the host GI tract and the immune system.

Many bacteria are associated specifically for the production of certain metabolites or signaling pathway that maintains the survival of the microflora. For example, hippurate and chlorogenic acid metabolite level in mice change due to microflora. The synthesis pathway depends on multiple bacteria species, which are not all present in ASF. This limits the bioavailability of nutrients to both host and microbe.

Additional strains of bacteria might need to be added for certain studies with metabolism, pathogenesis, or microbe interactions. It is impossible to study the complete organization of the gut microbiome and all its contributions to the host system, especially with relations to disease development and nutrition, with only eight microbes. Furthermore, there are differences between mice and human microflora. So there are limitations to studies using ASF mice to depict human inflammatory diseases like IBD, arthritis, and cancer. ASF is only a basis for developing hypotheses for mice with complex microflora.



</doc>
<doc id="42426935" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42426935" title="Bacillus isolates">
Bacillus isolates

"Bacillus" isolates have a variety of biotechnological applications.

Nattō-derived "Bacillus" isolates include nootropics pyrazine and tetramethylpyrazine, as well as the anticoagulant enzyme nattokinase.

"Bacillus" is utilized in the production of the chemotherapy medicine L-asparaginase. "Bacillus subtilis" is utilized in the production of hyaluronic acid and α-amylase. "Bacillus thuringiensis" isolates are utilized as biopesticides.

"Bacillus megaterium" has been an important industrial organism for decades. It produces penicillin amidase used to make synthetic penicillin, various amylases used in the baking industry and glucose dehydrogenase used in glucose blood tests. "B. megaterium" is also used for the production of pyruvate, vitamin B12, drugs with fungicidal and antiviral properties, etc. It produces enzymes for modifying corticosteroids, as well as several amino acid dehydrogenases.

"Bacillus subtilis" can biosynthesize silver nanoparticles. "Bacillus badius" can be used to cleaves penicillin G to 6-amino penicillanic acid (6-APA) and phenyl acetic acid (PAA). Certain "Bacillus" have mycorrhiza-like activity and potential bioremediation applications.

Bacillus isolates are used industrially as nutritional probiotics. Additional "Bacillus" isolates include gamma-D-Glutamyl-meso-diaminopimelate peptidase, sonorensin, gamma-cyclodextrin, 2,5-Diketopiperazines, laccases, bacteriocin, paenicidin A, tridecaptin A₁, and paenicidin B.



</doc>
<doc id="43183712" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43183712" title="Bioluminescent bacteria">
Bioluminescent bacteria

Bioluminescent bacteria are light-producing bacteria that are predominantly present in sea water, marine sediments, the surface of decomposing fish and in the gut of marine animals. While not as common, bacterial bioluminescence is also found in terrestrial and freshwater bacteria. These bacteria may be free living (such as "Vibrio harveyi") or in symbiosis with animals such as the Hawaiian Bobtail squid ("Aliivibrio fischeri") or terrestrial nematodes ("Photorhabdus luminescens"). The host organisms provide these bacteria a safe home and sufficient nutrition. In exchange, the hosts use the light produced by the bacteria for camouflage, prey and/or mate attraction. Bioluminescent bacteria have evolved symbiotic relationships with other organisms in which both participants benefit close to equally. Another possible reason bacteria use luminescence reaction is for quorum sensing, an ability to regulate gene expression in response to bacterial cell density.

Records of bioluminescent bacteria existed for thousands of years. They appear in the folklore of many regions, including Scandinavia and the Indian subcontinent. Both Aristotle and Charles Darwin have described the phenomenon of the oceans glowing. Since its discovery less than 30 years ago, the enzyme luciferase and its regulatory gene, "lux", have led to major advances in molecular biology, through use as a reporter gene. Luciferase was first purified by McElroy and Green in 1955. It was later discovered that there were two subunits to luciferase, called subunits α and β. The genes encoding these enzymes, "luxA" and "luxB," respectively, were first isolated in the "lux" operon of "Aliivibrio fisheri" "."

The wide-ranged biological purposes of bio-luminescence include but are not limited to attraction of mates, defense against predators, and warning signals. In the case of bioluminescent bacteria, bio-luminescence mainly serves as a form of dispersal. It has been hypothesized that enteric bacteria (bacteria that survive in the guts of other organisms) - especially those prevalent in the depths of the ocean - employ bio-luminescence as an effective form of distribution. After making their way into the digestive tracts of fish and other marine organisms and being excreted in fecal pellets, bioluminescent bacteria are able to utilize their bio-luminescent capabilities to lure in other organisms and prompt ingestion of these bacterial-containing fecal pellets. The bio-luminescence of bacteria thereby ensures their survival, persistence, and dispersal as they are able to enter and inhabit other organisms.

The regulation of bio-luminescence in bacteria is achieved through the regulation of the oxidative enzyme called luciferase. It is important that bio-luminescent bacteria decrease production rates of luciferase when the population is sparse in number in order to conserve energy. Thus, bacterial bioluminescence is regulated by means of chemical communication referred to as quorum sensing. Essentially, certain signaling molecules named autoinducers with specific bacterial receptors become activated when the population density of bacteria is high enough. The activation of these receptors leads to a coordinated induction of luciferase production that ultimately yields visible luminescence.

The chemical reaction that is responsible for bio-luminescence is catalyzed by the enzyme luciferase. In the presence of oxygen, luciferase catalyzes the oxidation of an organic molecule called luciferin. Though bio-luminescence across a diverse range of organisms such as bacteria, insects, and dinoflagellates function in this general manner (utilizing luciferase and luciferin), there are different types of luciferin-luciferase systems. For bacterial bio-luminescence specifically, the biochemical reaction involves the oxidation of an aliphatic aldehyde by a reduced flavin mononucleotide. The products of this oxidation reaction include an oxidized flavin mononucleotide, a fatty acid chain, and energy in the form of a blue-green visible light.

Reaction: FMNH2 + O2 + RCHO → FMN + RCOOH + H2O + light

It has been proposed that bioelectromagnetics may be involved in biological processes behind bio-luminescence, which may function as a pump. This pump may involve mm and sub-mm wave coupling of bio-luminescence radiation for quorum sensing regulation. This proposal arises from the observation that mm-wave radiation exposure has been reported to induce changes in DNA conformation and possibly gene expression. Agents that change DNA conformation also increase light emission in bio-luminescence of bacteria.

Of all light emitters in the ocean, bio-luminescent bacteria is the most abundant and diverse. However, the distribution of bio-luminescent bacteria is uneven, which suggests evolutionary adaptations. The bacterial species in terrestrial genera such as Photorhabdus are bio-luminescent. On the other hand, marine genera with bio-luminescent species such as Vibrio and Shewanella oneidensis have different closely related species that are not light emitters. Nevertheless, all bio-luminescent bacteria share a common gene sequence: the enzymatic oxidation of Aldehyde and reduced Flavin mononucleotide by luciferase which are contained in the lux operon. Bacteria from distinct ecological niches contain this gene sequence; therefore, the identical gene sequence evidently suggests that bio-luminescence bacteria result from evolutionary adaptations.

After the discovery of the lux operon, the use of bioluminescent bacteria as a laboratory tool is claimed to have revolutionized the area of environmental microbiology. The applications of bioluminescent bacteria include biosensors for detection of contaminants, measurement of pollutant toxicity and monitoring of genetically engineered bacteria released into the environment. Biosensors, created by placing a "lux" gene construct under the control of an inducible promoter, can be used to determine the concentration of specific pollutants. Biosensors are also able to distinguish between pollutants that are bioavailable and those that are inert and unavailable. For example, "Pseudomonas fluorescens" has been genetically engineered to be capable of degrading salicylate and naphthalene, and is used as a biosensor to assess the bioavailability of salicylate and naphthalene. Biosensors can also be used as an indicator of cellular metabolic activity and to detect the presence of pathogens.

The light-producing chemistry behind bioluminescence varies across the lineages of bioluminescent organisms. Based on this observation, bioluminescence is believed to have evolved independently at least 40 times. In bioluminescent bacteria, the reclassification of the members of"Vibrio fischeri" species group as a new genus, "Aliivibrio," has led to increased interest in the evolutionary origins of bioluminescence"." Among bacteria, the distribution of bioluminescent species is polyphyletic. For instance, while all species in the terrestrial genus "Photorhabdus" are luminescent, the genera "Aliivibrio, Photobacterium, Shewanella" and "Vibrio" contain both luminous and non-luminous species. Despite bioluminescence in bacteria not sharing a common origin, they all share a gene sequence in common. The appearance of the highly conserved lux operon in bacteria from very different ecological niches suggests a strong selective advantage despite the high energetic costs of producing light. DNA repair is thought to be the initial selective advantage for light production in bacteria. Consequently, the lux operon may have been lost in bacteria that evolved more efficient DNA repair systems but retained in those where visible light became a selective advantage. The evolution of quorum sensing is believed to have afforded further selective advantage for light production. Quorum sensing allows bacteria to conserve energy by ensuring that they do not synthesize light-producing chemicals unless a sufficient concentration are present to be visible.

All bacterial species that have been reported to possess bioluminescence belong within the families "Vibrionaceae", "Shewanellaceae", or "Enterobacteriaceae", all of which are assigned to the class Gammaproteobacteria.

Bioluminescent bacteria are most abundant in marine environments during spring blooms when there are high nutrient concentrations. These light-emitting organisms are found mainly in coastal waters near the outflow of rivers, such as the northern Adriatic Sea, Gulf of Trieste, northwestern part of the Caspian Sea, coast of Africa and many more. These are known as milky seas. Bioluminescent bacteria are also found in freshwater and terrestrial environments but are less wide spread than in seawater environments. They are found globally, as free-living, symbiotic or parasitic forms and possibly as opportunistic pathogens. Factors that affect the distribution of bioluminescent bacteria include temperature, salinity, nutrient concentration, pH level and solar radiation. For example, "Aliivibrio" "fischeri" grows favourably in environments that have temperatures between 5 and 30 °C and a pH that is less than 6.8; whereas, "Photobacterium phosphoreum" thrives in conditions that have temperatures between 5 and 25 °C and a pH that is less than 7.0.

All bioluminescent bacteria share a common gene sequence: the "lux" operon characterized by the "luxCDABE" gene organization. "LuxAB" codes for luciferase while "luxCDE" codes for a fatty-acid reductase complex that is responsible for synthesizing aldehydes for the bioluminescent reaction. Despite this common gene organization, variations, such as the presence of other lux genes, can be observed among species. Based on similarities in gene content and organization, the "lux" operon can be organized into the following four distinct types: the "Aliivibrio"/"Shewanella" type, the "Photobacterium" type, the"Vibrio"/"Candidatus" Photodesmus type, and the "Photorhabdus" type. While this organization follows the genera classification level for members of "Vibrionaceae" ("Aliivibrio", "Photobacterium", and "Vibrio"), its evolutionary history is not known.

With the exception of the "Photorhabdus" operon type, all variants of the "lux" operon contain the flavin reductase-encoding "luxG" gene. Most of the "Aliivibrio"/"Shewanella" type operons contain additional "luxI/luxR" regulatory genes that are used for autoinduction during quorum sensing. The "Photobacterum" operon type is characterized by the presence of "rib" genes that code for riboflavin, and forms the "lux-rib" operon"." The"Vibrio"/"Candidatus" Photodesmus operon type differs from both the "Aliivibrio"/"Shewanella" and the "Photobacterium" operon types in that the operon has no regulatory genes directly associated with it.

All bacterial luciferases are approximately 80 KDa heterodimers containing two subunits: α and β. The α subunit is responsible for light emission. The "luxA" and "luxB" genes encode for the α and β subunits, respectively. In most bioluminescent bacteria, the "luxA" and "luxB" genes are flanked upstream by "luxC" and "luxD" and downstream by "luxE".

The bioluminescent reaction is as follows:

FMNH + O + R-CHO -> FMN + HO + R-COOH + Light (~ 495 nm)

Molecular oxygen reacts with FMNH2 (reduced flavin mononucleotide) and a long-chain aldehyde to produce FMN (flavin mononucleotide), water and a corresponding fatty acid. The blue-green light emission of bioluminescence, such as that produced by "Photobacterium phosphoreum" and "Vibro harveyi", results from this reaction. Because light emission involves expending six ATP molecules for each photon, it is an energetically expensive process. For this reason, light emission is not constitutively expressed in bioluminescent bacteria; it is expressed only when physiologically necessary. 

Bioluminescence in bacteria can be regulated through a phenomenon known as autoinduction or quorum sensing. Quorom sensing is a form of cell-to-cell communication that alters gene expression in response to cell density. Autoinducer is a diffusible pheromone produced constitutively by bioluminescent bacteria and serves as an extracellular signalling molecule. When the concentration of autoinducer secreted by bioluminescent cells in the environment reaches a threshold (above 10 cells per mL), it induces the expression of luciferase and other enzymes involved in bioluminescence. Bacteria are able to estimate their density by sensing the level of autoinducer in the environment and regulate their bioluminescence such that it is expressed only when there is a sufficiently high cell population. A sufficiently high cell population ensures that the bioluminescence produced by the cells will be visible in the environment.

A well known example of quorum sensing is that which occurs between "Aliivibrio fischeri" and its host. This process is regulated by LuxI and LuxR, encoded by "luxI" and "luxR" respectively. LuxI is autoinducer synthase that produces autoinducer (AI) while LuxR functions as both a receptor and transcription factor for the lux operon. When LuxR binds AI, LuxR-AI complex activates transcription of the lux operon and induces the expression of luciferase. Using this system, "A. fischeri" has shown that bioluminescence is expressed only when the bacteria are host-associated and have reached sufficient cell densities.

Another example of quorum sensing by bioluminescent bacteria is by "Vibrio harveyi", which are known to be free-living. Unlike "Aliivibrio fischeri," "V. harveyi" do not possess the "luxI/luxR" regulatory genes and therefore have a different mechanism of quorum sensing regulation. Instead, they use the system known as three-channel quorum sensing system.

The uses of bioluminescence and its biological and ecological significance for animals, including host organisms for bacteria symbiosis, have been widely studied. The biological role and evolutionary history for specifically bioluminescent bacteria still remains quite mysterious and unclear. However, there are continually new studies being done to determine the impacts that bacterial bioluminescence can have on our constantly changing environment and society. Aside from the many scientific and medical uses, scientists have also recently begun to come together with artists and designers to explore new ways of incorporating bioluminescent bacteria, as well as bioluminescent plants, into urban light sources to reduce the need for electricity. They have also begun to use bioluminescent bacteria as a form of art and urban design for the wonder and enjoyment of human society.

One explanation for the role of bacterial bioluminescence is from the biochemical aspect. Several studies have shown the biochemical roles of the luminescence pathway. It can function as an alternate pathway for electron flow under low oxygen concentration, which can be advantageous when no fermentable substrate is available. In this process, light emission is a side product of the metabolism.

Evidence also suggests that bacterial luciferase contributes to the resistance of oxidative stress. In laboratory culture, "luxA" and "luxB" mutants of "Vibrio harveyi", which lacked luciferase activity, showed impairment of growth under high oxidative stress compared to wild type. The "luxD" mutants, which had an unaffected luciferase but were unable to produce luminescence, showed little or no difference. This suggests that luciferase mediates the detoxification of reactive oxygen.

Bacterial bioluminescence has also been proposed to be a source of internal light in photoreactivation, a DNA repair process carried out by photolyase. Experiments have shown that non-luminescent "V. harveyi" mutants are more sensitive to UV irradiation, suggesting the existence of a bioluminescent-mediated DNA repair system.

Another hypothesis, called the “bait hypothesis”, is that bacterial bioluminescence attracts predators who will assist in their dispersal. They are either directly ingested by fish or indirectly ingested by zooplankton that will eventually be consumed by higher trophic levels. Ultimately, this may allow passage into the fish gut, a nutrient-rich environment where the bacteria can divide, be excreted, and continue their cycle. Experiments using luminescent "Photobacterium leiognathi" and non-luminescent mutants have shown that luminescence attracts zooplankton and fish, thus supporting this hypothesis.

The symbiotic relationship between the Hawaiian bobtail squid "Euprymna scolopes" and the marine gram-negative bacterium "Aliivibrio fischeri" has been well studied. The two organisms exhibit a mutualistic relationship in which bioluminescence produced by "A. fischeri" helps to attract pray to the squid host, which provides nutrient-rich tissues and a protected environment for"A. fischeri". Bioluminescence provided by "A. fischeri" also aids in the defense of the squid "E. scolopes" by providing camouflage during its nighttime foraging activity. Following bacterial colonization, the specialized organs of the squid undergo developmental changes and a relationship becomes established. The squid expels 90% of the bacterial population each morning, because it no longer needs to produce bioluminescence in the daylight. This expulsion benefits the bacteria by aiding in their dissemination. A single expulsion by one bobtail squid produces enough bacterial symbionts to fill 10,000m of seawater at a concentration that is comparable to what is found in coastal waters. Thus, in at least some habitats, the symbiotic relationship between ""A. fischeri"" and ""E. scolopes"" plays a key role in determining the abundance and distribution of ""E. scolopes"." There is a higher abundance of ""A. fischeri"" in the vicinity of a population of "E. scolopes" and this abundance markedly decreases with increasing distance from the host's habitat.

Bioluminescent "Photobacterium" species also engage in mutually beneficial associations with fish and squid. Dense populations of "P. kishitanii, P. leiogathi," and "P. mandapamensis" can live in the light organs of marine fish and squid, and are provided with nutrients and oxygen for reproduction in return for providing bioluminescence to their hosts, which can aid in sex-specific signaling, predator avoidance, locating or attracting prey, and schooling.



</doc>
<doc id="9969312" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9969312" title="Hydrogen oxidizing bacteria">
Hydrogen oxidizing bacteria

Hydrogen oxidizing bacteria are a group of facultative autotrophs that can use hydrogen as an electron donor.

They can be divided into aerobes and anaerobes. The former use hydrogen as an electron donor and oxygen as an acceptor while the latter use sulphate or nitrogen dioxide as electron acceptors. Some species of both bacteria types have been isolated in different environments, for example in fresh waters, sediments, soils, activated sludge, hot springs, hydrothermal vents and percolating water.

These organisms are able to exploit the special properties of molecular hydrogen (for instance redox potential and diffusion coefficient) thanks to the presence of hydrogenases. The aerobic hydrogen oxidizing bacteria are facultative autotrophs, but they can also have mixotrophic or completely heterotrophic growth. Most of them show greater growth on organic substrates.The use of hydrogen as an electron donor coupled with the ability to synthesize organic matter, through the reductive assimilation of CO, characterize the hydrogen oxidizing bacteria. Among the most represented genres of these organisms we find: Caminibacter, Aquifex, Ralstonia and Paracoccus. 

The most widespread element on our Earth is hydrogen, which represents around three-quarters of all the elements. In the atmosphere, its concentration is about 0.5-0.6 ppm and so here it represents the most abundant trace gas, after methane. Therefore, H can be used as energy source in several biological processes, also because it has a highly negative redox potential (E’= -0.414 V) . It can be coupled with different compounds:

-       O: the oxic respiration is performed (H+1/2O → HO)

-       Oxidized compounds, such as carbon dioxide or sulfate. 

In the ecosystems, hydrogen can be produced through biological and abiotic processes .

The abiotic processes are mainly due to geothermal production and serpentinization. In the first case, hydrogen is usually present as a gas and probably can be obtained by different reactions:

1.      Water may react with silicon radical at high temperature:

Si· + HO → SiOH + H·

H· + H· → H

2.      The proposed reaction between iron oxides and water, at temperatures higher than 800°C:

2FeO + HO → FeO + H

2FeO + HO → 3FeO + H 

On the other hand, serpentinization is an exothermic geochemical mechanism that occurs when, thanks to the tectonic movements, the ultramafic rocks raise and reach the water. This process can bring to the production of large quantities of H, but also of methane and organic substances. 

The main mechanisms that lead to the formation of hydrogen, involving different microorganisms, are nitrogen fixation and fermentation. The first one happens in some bacteria, such as heterocystous and non-heterocystous cyanobacteria, that have a specialized enzyme, the nitrogenase, which catalizes the reduction of N to NH. In addition, these microorganisms have another enzyme, the hydrogenase, that oxidizes the H released as a by-product. Therefore, in this type of bacteria, the amount of hydrogen produced depends on the ratio between H production and consumption. In some cases, the H can be present in the environments because the N-fixing bacteria can have a low quantity of hydrogenases. Instead, fermentation is performed by some strict or facultative anaerobic heterotrophic bacteria, in particular Clostridia ,that degrade organic molecules, producing hydrogen as one of the products. Therefore, this type of metabolism mainly occurs in anoxic sites, such as lake sediments, deep-sea hydrothermal vents and human gut. 

Probably mainly due to the biotic processes, in the marine habitats it was observed that the concentrations of hydrogen were supersaturated. In all these environments, the highest concentrations were in the first metres, decreasing to the thermocline and reaching the lowest concentrations in the deep oceans. Globally, tropical and subtropical oceans appear to have the most abundant quantity of H, while the least amount is present in higher latitudes However, it was observed that the release of hydrogen in the oceans is dependent on the solar radiation, showing a daily change with the maximum peak at noon. Nitrogen fixation, performed by cyanobacteria, leads to the production of one molecule of H at least. This metabolism is thought to be the major one involved in the increase of H in the oceans . Despite there are some evidences of this, more data need to be collected to finally correlate the two phenomena.

H is an important electron donor in a particular environment: Hydrothermal vents. In this environment hydrogen oxidation represents a significant origin of energy, sufficient to conduct ATP synthesis and autotrophic CO fixation so hydrogen oxidizing bacteria are relevant in deep sea habitats. Among the main chemosynthetic reactions that take place in hydrothermal vents, the oxidation of the sulphide and the hydrogen one covers a central role. In particular, for autotrophic carbon fixation, hydrogen oxidation metabolism is more favored than the sulfide/thiosulfate oxidation, although less energy is released (only -237 kJ/mol compared to – 797 kJ/mol). To fix a mole of carbon during the hydrogen oxidation, one third of the energy necessary for the sulphide oxidation is used. This is due to the redox potential of hydrogen, which is more negative than NAD (P)/H. Based on the amount of sulphide, hydrogen and other farm biotics, this phenomenon can be intensified leading, in some cases, to an energy production by oxidation of the hydrogen of 10 -18 times higher than produced one by the sulphide oxidation.

Aerobic Hydrogen oxidizing bacteria, or sometimes "Knallgas"-bacteria, are bacteria that oxidize hydrogen as a source of energy with oxygen as final electron acceptor. See microbial metabolism (hydrogen oxidation). These bacteria include "Hydrogenobacter thermophilus", "Cupriavidus necator", and "Hydrogenovibrio marinus" There are both Gram positive and Gram negative knallgas bacteria.

Most grow best under microaerobic conditions. They do this because the hydrogenase enzyme used in hydrogen oxidation is inhibited by the presence of oxygen, but oxygen is still needed as a terminal electron acceptor.

The word "Knallgas" means "oxyhydrogen" (a mixture of hydrogen and oxygen, literally "bang-gas") in Germanic languages.

Ocean’s surface water is characterised by a high concentration of hydrogen . In 1989, for the first time, an aerobic hydrogen oxidizing bacteria was isolated from sea water and the discovery of this strain was very important also because for the first time a hydrogen oxidizing bacteria was identified in normal temperature condition. Experimentally it has been shown that the MH-110 strain is able to grow in an atmosphere (under a continuous gas flow system) characterized by an oxygen concentration of 40% (analogue characteristics are present in the surface water from which the bacteria were isolated which is, in fact, a fairly aerated region). This differs from the usual behaviour of hydrogen oxidizing bacteria which in general thrive strictly under microaerophilic conditions (<10% O).

This strain is also capable to couple the Hydrogen oxidation with the reduction of sulfur compounds such as thiosulfate and tetrathionate.

Knallgas bacteria are a group of bacteria which are able to fix carbon dioxide using H as electron donor and energy source and O as terminal electron acceptor. Actually, Knallgas bacteria stand out from the hydrogen oxydizing bacteria which, although using H as an electron donor, are not able to fix CO, as Knallgas do.

This aerobic hydrogen oxidation, also known as the Knallgas reaction, which releases a considerable amount of energy, determines the formation of proton motive force (PMF).

H + O formula_1 HO ΔG = -237 Kj

The key enzymes involved in this reaction are the hydrogenase which lead the electrons through the electron transport chain, from hydrogen to the final acceptor, that is O which is actually reduced in water, the only by-product. The hydrogenases that are divided into three categories according to the type of metal present in the active site, are the enzymes that allow the oxidation of hydrogen. The first evidence of the presence of these enzymes has been found for the first time in "Pseudomonas saccharophila", "Alcaligenes ruhlandii" and "Alcaligenese eutrophus" in which there were two types of hydrogenases: cytoplasmatic and membrane-bound. If the first enzyme takes up hydrogen and reduce the NAD in NADH for carbon fixation, the second is involved in the generation of the proton motive force. Anyway, in most of the knallgas bacteria only one type of hydrogensase was observed, the one bound to the membrane that provided hydrogen activation.

These microorganisms are also defined as facultative authotrophs, neverthless some of them are also able to live in completely heterotrophic conditions using organic substances as electron donor and energy source, even if in this case the hydrogenase activity takes on less importance or is completely absent. 

However, Knallgas bacteria, growing as chemolithoautotrophs, as soon as they integrate every molecule of Co, they can produce, through the Calvin Benson Cycle or reverse citric acid cycle (TCA cycle), biomolecules necessary for the cell.

6H + 2O + CO formula_1 (CHO) + 5HO

In particular, a recent study carried out on "Alcaligenes eutropha", one of the most representative species of Knallgas bacteria,  highlighted that at low concentrations of O (about 10 mol %) and consequently with a low ΔH/ΔCO molar ratio (3.3), the energy efficiency of Co2 fixation increasing until of 50%.This is an interesting characteristic of these microorganisms because once assimilated, the carbon dioxide is reduced to polyhydroxybutyrate , from which its derivatives, being biodegradable, are used in various eco-sustainable applications.


</doc>
<doc id="25175105" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25175105" title="Genetically modified bacteria">
Genetically modified bacteria

Genetically modified bacteria were the first organisms to be modified in the laboratory, due to their simple genetics. These organisms are now used for several purposes, and are particularly important in producing large amounts of pure human proteins for use in medicine.

The first example of this occurred in 1978 when Herbert Boyer, working at a University of California laboratory, took a version of the human insulin gene and inserted into the bacterium "Escherichia coli" to produce synthetic "human" insulin. Four years later, it was approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
Bacteria were the first organisms to be genetically modified in the laboratory, due to the relative ease of modifying their chromosomes. This ease made them important tools for the creation of other GMOs. Genes and other genetic information from a wide range of organisms can be added to a plasmid and inserted into bacteria for storage and modification. Bacteria are cheap, easy to grow, clonal, multiply quickly, are relatively easy to transform, and can be stored at -80 °C almost indefinitely. Once a gene is isolated it can be stored inside the bacteria, providing an unlimited supply for research. The large number of custom plasmids make manipulating DNA excised from bacteria relatively easy.

Their ease of use has made them great tools for scientists looking to study gene function and evolution. Most DNA manipulation takes place within bacterial plasmids before being transferred to another host. Bacteria are the simplest model organism and most of our early understanding of molecular biology comes from studying "Escherichia coli". Scientists can easily manipulate and combine genes within the bacteria to create novel or disrupted proteins and observe the effect this has on various molecular systems. Researchers have combined the genes from bacteria and archaea, leading to insights on how these two diverged in the past. In the field of synthetic biology, they have been used to test various synthetic approaches, from synthesizing genomes to creating novel nucleotides.

Bacteria have been used in the production of food for a long time, and specific strains have been developed and selected for that work on an industrial scale. They can be used to produce enzymes, amino acids, flavourings, and other compounds used in food production. With the advent of genetic engineering, new genetic changes can easily be introduced into these bacteria. Most food-producing bacteria are lactic acid bacteria, and this is where the majority of research into genetically engineering food-producing bacteria has gone. The bacteria can be modified to operate more efficiently, reduce toxic byproduct production, increase output, create improved compounds, and remove unnecessary pathways. Food products from genetically modified bacteria include alpha-amylase, which converts starch to simple sugars, chymosin, which clots milk protein for cheese making, and pectinesterase, which improves fruit juice clarity.

Chymosin is an enzyme found in a calf's stomach. This helps the calf break down the milk to digest. Chymosin is necessary in order to make cheese. It turns the milk into cheese. Scientists have found a way to alter yeast to grow Chymosin enzymes for making cheese. This process is much more efficient because previously calves had to be slaughtered in order to extract the Chymosin from the inner lining of the stomach. Also this offers a vegetarian friendly way to make cheese. it depends on what and how the Bactria does the process.

Genetically modified bacteria are used to produce large amounts of proteins for industrial use. Generally the bacteria are grown to a large volume before the gene encoding the protein is activated. The bacteria are then harvested and the desired protein purified from them. The high cost of extraction and purification has meant that only high value products have been produced at an industrial scale.

The majority of the industrial products from bacteria are human proteins for use in medicine. Many of these proteins are impossible or difficult to obtain via natural methods and they are less likely to be contaminated with pathogens, making them safer. Prior to recombinant protein products, several treatments were derived from cadavers or other donated body fluids and could transmit diseases. Indeed, transfusion of blood products had previously led to unintentional infection of haemophiliacs with HIV or hepatitis C; similarly, treatment with human growth hormone derived from cadaver pituitary glands may have led to outbreaks of Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease.

The first medicinal use of GM bacteria was to produce the protein insulin to treat diabetes. Other medicines produced include clotting factors to treat haemophilia, human growth hormone to treat various forms of dwarfism, interferon to treat some cancers, erythropoietin for anemic patients, and tissue plasminogen activator which dissolves blood clots. Outside of medicine they have been used to produce biofuels. There is interest in developing an extracellular expression system within the bacteria to reduce costs and make the production of more products economical.

With greater understanding of the role that the micobiome plays in human health, there is the potential to treat diseases by genetically altering the bacteria to, themselves, be therapeutic agents. Ideas include altering gut bacteria so they destroy harmful bacteria, or using bacteria to replace or increase deficient enzymes or proteins. One research focus is to modify "Lactobacillus", bacteria that naturally provide some protection against HIV, with genes that will further enhance this protection. The bacteria which generally cause tooth decay have been engineered to no longer produce tooth-corroding lactic acid. These transgenic bacteria, if allowed to colonize a person's mouth, could perhaps reduce the formation of cavities. Transgenic microbes have also been used in recent research to kill or hinder tumors, and to fight Crohn's disease.

If the bacteria do not form colonies inside the patient, the person must repeatedly ingest the modified bacteria in order to get the required doses. Enabling the bacteria to form a colony could provide a more long-term solution, but could also raise safety concerns as interactions between bacteria and the human body are less well understood than with traditional drugs.

One example of such an intermediate, which only forms short-term colonies in the gastrointestinal tract, may be Lactobacillus Acidophilus MPH734. This is used as a specific in the treatment of Lactose Intolerance. This genetically modified version of Lactobacillus acidophilus bacteria produces a missing enzyme called lactase which is used for the digestion of lactose found in dairy products or, more commonly, in food prepared with dairy products. The short term colony is induced over a one-week, 21-pill treatment regimen, afterwhich, the temporary colony can produce lactase for three months or more before it is removed from the body by a natural processes. The induction regimen can be repeated as often as necessary to maintain protection from the symptoms of lactose intolerance, or discontinued with no consequences, except the return of the original symptoms.

There are concerns that horizontal gene transfer to other bacteria could have unknown effects. As of 2018 there are clinical trials underway testing the efficacy and safety of these treatments.

For over a century bacteria have been used in agriculture. Crops have been inoculated with Rhizobia (and more recently "Azospirillum") to increase their production or to allow them to be grown outside their original habitat. Application of "Bacillus thuringiensis" (Bt) and other bacteria can help protect crops from insect infestation and plant diseases. With advances in genetic engineering, these bacteria have been manipulated for increased efficiency and expanded host range. Markers have also been added to aid in tracing the spread of the bacteria. The bacteria that naturally colonise certain crops have also been modified, in some cases to express the Bt genes responsible for pest resistance. "Pseudomonas" strains of bacteria cause frost damage by nucleating water into ice crystals around themselves. This led to the development of ice-minus bacteria, that have the ice-forming genes removed. When applied to crops they can compete with the ice-plus bacteria and confer some frost resistance.

Other uses for genetically modified bacteria include bioremediation, where the bacteria are used to convert pollutants into a less toxic form. Genetic engineering can increase the levels of the enzymes used to degrade a toxin or to make the bacteria more stable under environmental conditions. GM bacteria have also been developed to leach copper from ore, clean up mercury pollution and detect arsenic in drinking water. Bioart has also been created using genetically modified bacteria. In the 1980s artist Jon Davis and geneticist Dana Boyd converted the Germanic symbol for femininity (ᛉ) into binary code and then into a DNA sequence, which was then expressed in "Escherichia coli". This was taken a step further in 2012, when a whole book was encoded onto DNA. Paintings have also been produced using bacteria transformed with fluorescent proteins.



</doc>
<doc id="45680415" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=45680415" title="Epiphytic bacteria">
Epiphytic bacteria

Epiphytic bacteria are bacteria which live non-parasitically on the surface of a plant on various organs such as the leaves, roots, flowers, buds, seeds and fruit. In current studies it has been determined that epiphytic bacteria generally don’t harm the plant, but promote the formation of ice crystals. Some produce an auxin hormone which promotes plant growth and plays a role in the life cycle of the bacteria. 

Different bacteria prefer different plants and different plant organs depending on the organ's nutritional content, and depending on the bacteria's colonization system which is controlled by the host plant. Bacteria which live on leaves are referred to as phyllobacteria, and bacteria which live on the root system are referred to as rhizabacteria. They adhere to the plant surface forms as 1-cluster 2- individual bacterial cell 3- biofilm . The age of the organ also affects the epiphytic bacteria population and characteristics and has a role in the inhibition of phytopathogen on plant. Epiphytic bacteria found in the marine environment have a role in the nitrogen cycle.

There are diverse species of epiphytic bacteria. An incomplete list:

Many epiphytic bacteria are rod-shaped, and classified as either gram negative or gram positive, pigmented or non-pigmented, fermentative or non-fermentative .

Non-pigmented epiphytic bacteria have high a GC content in their genome, a characteristic which protects the bacteria from the ultraviolet rays of the sun. Because of this, these bacteria have special nutritional requirements. 
Current studies on epiphytic bacteria are underway for biotechnological applications areas such as the promotion of plant growth. Epiphytic bacteria are removed from the plant surface through ultraviolet radiation, chemical surface disinfection, and washing .



</doc>
<doc id="46286881" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46286881" title="Poribacteria">
Poribacteria

Poribacteria are a candidate phylum of bacteria originally identified in the microbiome of sea sponges ("Porifera"). Poribacteria were distinguished from other microorganisms associated with sea sponges by their distinctive morphology featuring a large membrane-bound cellular compartment that frequently contains DNA, a highly unusual feature for a prokaryote. Poribacteria are Gram-negative mixotrophs.

Single-cell genomics analysis of poribacteria reveals a genome with a lower size bound of 1.88 megabases and 1585 protein-coding genes, of which an unusually high 24% have no homology to known genes. Among the genes of identifiable homology, genetic infrastructure can be identified for aerobic metabolism, denitrification and urea uptake, and carbon fixation through the Wood–Ljungdahl pathway.

The poribacterial genome is also reported to contain an unusually high number of phyH-domain proteins, which are enzymes involved in oxidative reactions. The functional significance of this observation is not known.

Cell compartmentalization into distinct membrane-bound organelles is a universal and defining property of eukaryotes, but had not been not observed in prokaryotes other than the Planctomycetes before the identification of Poribacteria. The distinctive poribacterial compartments were originally identified using fluorescence in situ hybridization and electron microscopy and were found to frequently, but not always, contain DNA. Genomic evidence reveals the presence of proteins associated with compartmentalization, but not of membrane coat proteins.

Genomic analyses of poribacteria reveal several families of cell-surface repeat proteins that resemble those found in eukaryotes, and are infrequently found in prokaryotes. Examples include ankyrin and leucine-rich repeat domains, as well as tetratricopeptides. Unusual low-density lipoprotein receptor repeat proteins are also found, of unknown function. Most of these protein families are thought to be involved in surface interactions with the sponge host.

In addition, genetic infrastructure for sterol biosynthesis is observed in poribacterial genomes, otherwise found almost exclusively in eukaryotes and the planctomycete Gemmata obscuriglobus.

Poribacteria are symbionts of sea sponges, among the most abundant microorganisms in the highly diverse microbiome of the sponge mesohyl. They have been found in a large variety of sponge species from diverse geographic origins. The distribution of microorganisms in the sponge microbiome can be vertically inherited, with adult sponges transmitting their distinctive microbial communities to offspring.


</doc>
<doc id="46603361" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46603361" title="Peptoniphilus">
Peptoniphilus

Peptoniphilus is a genus of bacteria in the phylum Firmicutes (Bacteria).

The name "Peptoniphilus" derives from:New Latin noun "peptonum", peptone; New Latin adjective "philus" from Greek adjective "philos (φίλος)" meaning friend, loving; New Latin masculine gender noun "Peptoniphilus", friend of peptone, referring to the use of peptone as a major energy source.

Peptoniphilus are gram positive anaerobic cocci that were formerly classified in the genus Peptostreptococcus. They are non-saccharolytic, use peptone as a major energy source and produce butyrate.

This genus is part of the vaginal and gut microbiota. They have been reported to as present in diabetic skin and soft tissue infections, bone and joint infections, surgical site infections, chorioamnionitis and bloodstream infections. They are typically found as part of polymicrobial infections but are difficult to recover with usual clinical cultures. They have been increasingly reported with the more widespread use of 16S PCR and MALDI-TOF for identification.

The genus contains 17 species (including basonyms and synonyms), namely 



</doc>
<doc id="46638993" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46638993" title="Microbiome in the Drosophila gut">
Microbiome in the Drosophila gut

The microbiota describes the sum of all symbiotic microorganisms (mutualism, commensalism or pathogenic) living on or in an organism. The fruit fly "Drosophila melanogaster" is a model organism and known as one of the most investigated organisms worldwide. The microbiota in flies is less complex than that found in humans. It still has an influence on the fitness of the fly, and it affects different life-history characteristics such as lifespan (life expectancy), resistance against pathogens (immunity) and metabolic processes (digestion). Considering the comprehensive toolkit available for research in "Drosophila", analysis of its microbiome could enhance our understanding of similar processes in other types of host-microbiota interactions, including those involving humans.

"Drosophila melanogaster" possesses a comparatively simple gut microbiota, consisting of only few bacterial species, mainly from two bacterial taxonomic groups: Firmicutes and Proteobacteria. The most common species belong to the families Lactobacillaceae (abundance of approx. 30%, members of the Firmicutes) and Acetobacteraceae (approx. 55%, members of the Proteobacteria). Other less common bacterial species are from the families Leuconostocaceae, Enterococceae, and Enterobacteriaceae (all with an abundance in between 2–4%). The most common species include "Lactobacillus plantarum", "Lactobacillus brevis", "Acetobacter pomorum" and "Enterococcus faecalis", while other species such as "Acetobacter aceti", "Acetobacter tropicalis" and "Acetobacter pasteurianus" are also often found.

The particular species of the host fly has a central influence on the composition and quality of the gut microbiota, even if flies are raised under similar conditions. Nevertheless, the host's diet and nutritional environment also shape the exact composition of the microbiota. For instance the exact pH of the food can kill certain bacterial species. In general, the type of food used by the fly affects the microbiota composition. Mushroom feeder species like "Drosophila fallen" and MicroDrosophila sp. harbour many Lactobacillales and generally maintain high bacterial diversity in their guts. The microbiota of flower feeders such as "Drosophila elegans" and "Drosophila flavohirta" shows higher abundance of Enterobacteriaceae and to a lesser extent of acido-philic bacteria (such as Acetobacteraceae and Lactobacillaceae) if compared to fruit-eating species such as "Drosophila hydei", "Drosophila immigrans", "Drosophila sulfurigaster", "Drosophila melanogaster", "Drosophila sechellia" or "Drosophila takahashii". The microbial load and bacterial composition also vary with the age of the host fly.

Feeding is a key determinant of the microbiota composition. Not only the diet influences presence and abundance of the bacteria inside the gut, but the bacteria also need to be taken up continuously from the environment to prevail as members of the intestinal flora. Feeding on feces seems to play a central role for establishment of the "Drosophila" microbiota, as it allows the flies to recycle the bacteria within a fly population at a particular time point and also across generations. Flies seed the embryonic eggshell with feces. Upon hatching, young larvae eat their eggshells and thereby pick up the bacteria. The microbiota, which subsequently establishes itself inside the gut of the developing larvae, is similar to that of the larvae's mothers.
This may further be promoted by the particular life history of the flies. Young adult flies, which harbor fewer bacteria than old flies, proliferate in an environment shaped by the feces of the preceding fly generation, thus allowing them to take up additional bacteria.

In the gut of "Drosophila melanogaster" the composition and action of the microbiome appears to be tightly regulated within compartments, that is different sections of the intestines. This is indicated by the differential expression of genes, especially with a regulatory function, in the epithelium of different parts of the gut. In detail, the gut is compartmentalized into three parts, the foregut, the midgut, and the hindgut. While foregut and hindgut are lined with a cuticle formed by the ectodermal epithelium, the midgut is of entodermal origin. In adult flies the midgut is further divided into five smaller regions. The immune response varies among the gut regions. The immune deficiency (IMD) pathway responds to bacterial infections and is activated by certain receptors (e.g., the peptidoglycan receptor protein PGRP-LC). These receptors and also other components of the "Drosophila" immune system such as Toll receptor and dDUOX pathway molecules control immune responses in ectodermal tissue of the anterior gut. Moreover, the anterior midgut is enriched in certain antimicrobial peptides (AMPs). This suggests that the immune defence in this area is particularly responsive, possibly because this regions represents the first contact region for newly taken up food, microbiota, and/or intestinal pathogens. In the middle and posterior midgut, other genes such as the receptor PGRP-LB, which down-regulates the IMD immune response, are expressed, possibly in order to minimize expression of immune defence against the microbiota. In addition, the microbiota itself seems to control the expression of several "Drosophila" metabolic genes within the midgut, possibly to facilitate digestion of food. Taken together, it appears that the interaction between host and microbiota is precisely regulated across different regions within the gut.

The microbiota seem to affect the lifespan of "Drosophila melanogaster". To date, the mechanisms of this effect remain elusive.
Fruit flies raised under axenic conditions (i.e., without any bacteria in the environment) or cured of their microbiota with antibiotics had a shorter lifespan than flies raised under normal conditions. The microbiota influence on longevity seems to be particularly strong early in development.
To date, however, the exact mechanisms underlying these effects remain elusive. It is possible that the microbiota-induced proliferation of intestinal stem cells and associated metabolic homeostasis is important in this context. In contrast, the microbiota seems to have a negative effect on lifespan in old "Drosophila melanogaster", because their removal in ageing flies increases longevity. Old flies have a reduced ability to fight infections and this may also relate to the bacterial members of the microbiota. In aged animals, immune responses may over-shoot, possibly harming the host and favoruing colonization with pathogens (e.g. "Gluconobacter morbifer").

Almost all current approaches for the characterization of "Drosophila" microbiota rely on destructive approaches, that is flies are killed, their gut is extracted and from these the bacteria are isolated and/or analyzed. For an assessment of microbiota dynamics across the lifespan of an individual fly or across development of a fly population, a non-destructive approach would be favorable. Such an approach was recently developed, focusing on the microbial characterization of fly feces. Fly feces are indeed informative on composition of the gut microbiota, since the diversity of gut bacteria, feces bacteria and bacteria of whole fly of "Drosophila melanogaster" are all strongly correlated. This new approach could be used to demonstrate the known influence of diets.



</doc>
<doc id="1564401" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1564401" title="Multiple drug resistance">
Multiple drug resistance

Multiple drug resistance (MDR), multidrug resistance or multiresistance is antimicrobial resistance shown by a species of microorganism to at least one antimicrobial drug in three or more antimicrobial categories. Antimicrobial categories are classifications of antimicrobial agents based on their mode of action and specific to target organisms. The MDR types most threatening to public health are MDR bacteria that resist multiple antibiotics; other types include MDR viruses, parasites (resistant to multiple antifungal, antiviral, and antiparasitic drugs of a wide chemical variety). Recognizing different degrees of MDR, the terms extensively drug-resistant (XDR) and pandrug-resistant (PDR) have been introduced. Extensively drug-resistant (XDR) is the non-susceptibility of one microorganism to all antimicrobial agents except in two or less antimicrobial categories. Within XDR, pandrug-resistant (PDR) is the non-susceptibility of a microorganism to all antimicrobial agents in all antimicrobial categories. The definitions were published in 2011 in the journal "Clinical Microbiology and Infection" and are openly accessible.

Common multidrug-resistant organisms are usually bacteria:

A group of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria of particular recent importance have been dubbed as the ESKAPE group ("Enterococcus faecium", "Staphylococcus aureus", "Klebsiella pneumoniae", "Acinetobacter baumannii", "Pseudomonas aeruginosa" and Enterobacter species).

Various microorganisms have survived for thousands of years by their ability to adapt to antimicrobial agents. They do so via spontaneous mutation or by DNA transfer. This process enables some bacteria to oppose the action of certain antibiotics, rendering the antibiotics ineffective. These microorganisms employ several mechanisms in attaining multi-drug resistance:

Many different bacteria now exhibit multi-drug resistance, including staphylococci, enterococci, gonococci, streptococci, salmonella, as well as numerous other Gram-negative bacteria and "Mycobacterium tuberculosis". Antibiotic resistant bacteria are able to transfer copies of DNA that code for a mechanism of resistance to other bacteria even distantly related to them, which then are also able to pass on the resistance genes and so generations of antibiotics resistant bacteria are produced. This process is called horizontal gene transfer.

Phage-resistant bacteria variants have been observed in human studies. As for antibiotics, horizontal transfer of phage resistance can be acquired by plasmid acquisition.

Yeasts such as "Candida species" can become resistant under long term treatment with azole preparations, requiring treatment with a different drug class.
Scedosporium prolificans infections are almost uniformly fatal because of their resistance to multiple antifungal agents.

HIV is the prime example of MDR against antivirals, as it mutates rapidly under monotherapy.
Influenza virus has become increasingly MDR; first to amantadines, then to neuraminidase inhibitors such as oseltamivir, (2008-2009: 98.5% of Influenza A tested resistant), also more commonly in people with weak immune systems. Cytomegalovirus can become resistant to ganciclovir and foscarnet under treatment, especially in immunosuppressed patients. Herpes simplex virus rarely becomes resistant to acyclovir preparations, mostly in the form of cross-resistance to famciclovir and valacyclovir, usually in immunosuppressed patients.

The prime example for MDR against antiparasitic drugs is malaria. "Plasmodium vivax" has become chloroquine and sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine resistant a few decades ago, and as of 2012 artemisinin-resistant Plasmodium falciparum has emerged in western Cambodia and western Thailand.
"Toxoplasma gondii" can also become resistant to artemisinin, as well as atovaquone and sulfadiazine, but is not usually MDR
Antihelminthic resistance is mainly reported in the veterinary literature, for example in connection with the practice of livestock drenching and has been recent focus of FDA regulation.

To limit the development of antimicrobial resistance, it has been suggested to:

The medical community relies on education of its prescribers, and self-regulation in the form of appeals to voluntary antimicrobial stewardship, which at hospitals may take the form of an antimicrobial stewardship program. It has been argued that depending on the cultural context government can aid in educating the public on the importance of restrictive use of antibiotics for human clinical use, but unlike narcotics, there is no regulation of its use anywhere in the world at this time. Antibiotic use has been restricted or regulated for treating animals raised for human consumption with success, in Denmark for example.

Infection prevention is the most efficient strategy of prevention of an infection with a MDR organism within a hospital, because there are few alternatives to antibiotics in the case of an extensively resistant or panresistant infection; if an infection is localized, removal or excision can be attempted (with MDR-TB the lung for example), but in the case of a systemic infection only generic measures like boosting the immune system with immunoglobulins may be possible. The use of bacteriophages (viruses which kill bacteria) is a developing area of possible therapeutic treatments.

It is necessary to develop new antibiotics over time since the selection of resistant bacteria cannot be prevented completely. This means with every application of a specific antibiotic, the survival of a few bacteria which already got a resistance gene against the substance is promoted, and the concerning bacterial population amplifies. Therefore, the resistance gene is farther distributed in the organism and the environment, and a higher percentage of bacteria means they no longer respond to a therapy with this specific antibiotic. In addition to developing new antibiotics, new strategies entirely must be implemented in order to keep the public safe from the event of total resistance. New strategies are being tested such as UV light treatments and bacteriophage utilization, however more resources must be dedicated to this cause.


APUA or Alliance for the Prudent Use of Antibiotics http://www.tufts.edu/med/apua/about_issue/multi_drug.shtml


</doc>
<doc id="46827493" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46827493" title="ParMRC system">
ParMRC system

The ParMRC system is a mechanism for sorting DNA plasmids to opposite ends of a bacterial cell during cell division. It consists of three proteins: ParM, an actin-like protein that forms elongating polymers to push two plasmids apart, and ParR, and ParC, which bind plasmids to ParM filaments and help to polymerize ParM.

There the plasmids are segregated and can replicate without interference from the chromosomal DNA. During cell division many plasmids are plagued with low copy numbers and thus evolved active segregation to avoid plasmid loss during cell division The process of this segregation is carried out by a small number of components, three to be exact, in the DNA, with incredible efficiency. The three components, a parC DNA site, and two proteins parR and parM all combine to create the ParMRC system, a type II plasmid partitioning system.

The process by which the plasmids are segregated from the chromosomal DNA is not an extremely complicated one and contains just three components. The first component ParM is an actin-like protein. The second is a DNA-binding adaptor protein known as ParR. The last component is a centromere-like region called ParC. The process works using all three of these components and has been evolved to work extremely efficiently. In the cell the ParM protein filaments search for plasmids. Next, they find the ParR and ParC that are headed to DNA molecules and push them to opposite poles of the cell in order to segregate them.

This type of process using filament forming actin-like protein (ParM) to move DNA to opposite sides of the cell has been adopted by several Bacteria as their main plasmid segregation systems, due to its efficiency. This discovery as well as improvements in technology, such as higher resolution in light microscopy, will soon allow scientists to track individual molecules in cells to reveal even more about this ParMRC system.


</doc>
<doc id="48018422" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48018422" title="Isolation chip">
Isolation chip

The Isolation chip (or ichip) is a method of culturing bacteria. Using regular methods, 99% of bacterial species are not able to be cultured as they do not grow in conditions made in a laboratory, a problem called the "Great Plate Count Anomaly". The ichip instead cultures bacterial species within its soil environment. The soil is diluted in molten agar and nutrients such that only a single cell, on average, grows in the ichip's small compartments or wells, hence the term "isolation". The chip is then enclosed in a semipermeable plastic membrane and buried back in the dirt to allow in nutrients not available in the lab. With this culturing method, about 50 to 60 percent of bacterial species are able to survive. Notably, the bacterial species "Eleftheria terrae", which makes the antibiotic teixobactin that has shown promise against many drug-resistant strains like methicillin-resistant "Staphylococcus aureus", was discovered using the ichip in 2015. In addition to antibiotics, it is argued that anti-cancer agents, anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressives (which have previously been discovered from bacteria) as well as potential energy sources could be discovered. The ichip was developed by the drug discovery company NovoBiotic Pharmaceuticals, founded by Kim Lewis and Slava Epstein.


</doc>
<doc id="48302751" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=48302751" title="Dissimilatory metal-reducing microorganisms">
Dissimilatory metal-reducing microorganisms

Dissimilatory metal-reducing microorganisms are a group of microorganisms (both bacteria and archaea) that can perform anaerobic respiration utilizing a metal as terminal electron acceptor rather than molecular oxygen (O), which is the terminal electron acceptor reduced to water (HO) in aerobic respiration. The most common metals used for this end are iron [Fe(III)] and manganese [Mn(IV)], which are reduced to Fe(II) and Mn(II) respectively, and most microorganisms that reduce Fe(III) can reduce Mn(IV) as well. But other metals and metalloids are also used as terminal electron acceptors, such as vanadium [V(V)], chromium [Cr(VI)], molybdenum [Mo(VI)], cobalt [Co(III)], palladium [Pd(II)], gold [Au(III)], and mercury [Hg(II)].

Dissimilatory metal reducers are a diverse group of microorganisms, which is reflected in the factors that affect the different forms of metal reduction. The process of dissimilatory metal reduction occurs in the absence of oxygen (O), but dissimilatory metal reducers include both obligate (strict) anaerobes, such as the family Geobacteraceae, and facultative anaerobes, such as "Shewanella" spp. As well, across the dissimilatory metal reducers species, various electron donors are used in the oxidative reaction that is coupled to metal reduction. For instance, some species are limited to small organic acids and hydrogen (H), whereas others may oxidize aromatic compounds. In certain instances, such as Cr(VI) reduction, the use of small organic compounds can optimize the rate of metal reduction. Another factor that influences metal respiration is environmental acidity. Although acidophilic and alkaliphilic dissimilatory metal reducers exist, the neutrophilic metal reducers group contains the most well-characterized genera. In soil and sediment environments, where the pH is often neutral, metals like iron are found in their solid oxidized forms, and exhibit variable reduction potential, which can affect their use by microorganisms.

Due to the impermeability of the cell wall to minerals and the insolubility of metal oxides, dissimilatory metal reducers have developed ways to reduce metals extracellularly via electron transfer. Cytochromes "c", which are transmembrane proteins, play an important role in transporting electrons from the cytosol to enzymes attached to the outside of the cell. The electrons are then further transported to the terminal electron acceptor via direct interaction between the enzymes and the metal oxide. In addition to establishing direct contact, dissimilatory metal reducers also display the ability to perform ranged metal reduction. For instance, some species of dissimilatory metal reducers produce compounds that can dissolve insoluble minerals or act as electron shuttles, enabling them to perform metal reduction from a distance. Other organic compounds frequently found in soils and sediments, such as humic acids, may also act as electron shuttles. In biofilms, nanowires and multistep electron hopping (in which electrons jump from cell to cell towards the mineral) have also been suggested as methods for reducing metals without requiring direct cell contact. It has been proposed that cytochromes c are involved in both of these mechanisms. In nanowires, for instance, cytochromes c function as the final component that transfers electrons to the metal oxide.

A wide range of Fe(III)-bearing minerals have been observed to function as terminal electron acceptors, including magnetite, hematite, goethite, lepidocrocite, ferrihydrite, hydrous ferric oxide, smectite, illite, jarosite, among others.

In natural systems, secondary minerals may form as a byproduct of bacterial metal reduction. Commonly observed secondary minerals produced during experimental bio-reduction by dissimilatory metal reducers include magnetite, siderite, green rust, vivianite, and hydrous Fe(II)-carbonate.



</doc>
<doc id="49057371" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49057371" title="Oxalotrophic">
Oxalotrophic

Oxalotrophic bacteria are bacteria capable of using oxalate as their sole source of carbon and energy. Oxalate is the anion of a salt of oxalic acid; oxalotrophs often consume calcium oxalate. Oxalotrophic bacteria are often facultative methylotrophs.


</doc>
<doc id="18530058" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=18530058" title="Bacillus (shape)">
Bacillus (shape)

A bacillus (plural bacilli), or bacilliform bacterium, is a rod-shaped bacterium or archaeon. Bacilli are found in many different taxonomic groups of bacteria. However, the name "Bacillus", capitalized and italicized, refers to a specific genus of bacteria. The name Bacilli, capitalized but not italicized, can also refer to a less specific taxonomic group of bacteria that includes two orders, one of which contains the genus "Bacillus". When the word is formatted with lowercase and not italicized, 'bacillus', it will most likely be referring to shape and not to the genus at all. Bacilliform bacteria are also often simply called rods when the bacteriologic context is clear.

Bacilli usually divide in the same plane and are solitary, but can combine to form diplobacilli, streptobacilli, and palisades. 


There is no connection between the shape of a bacterium and its color in the Gram staining. MacConkey agar can be used to distinguish among Gram negative bacilli such as "E. coli" and salmonella.



</doc>
<doc id="49265835" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=49265835" title="Gas vesicle">
Gas vesicle

Gas vesicles are nanocompartments in certain prokaryotic organisms, which help in buoyancy. Gas vesicles are composed entirely of protein; no lipids or carbohydrates have been detected.

Gas vesicles occur primarily in aquatic organisms as they are used to modulate the cell's buoyancy and modify the cell's position in the water column so it can be optimally located for photosynthesis or move to locations with more or less oxygen. Organisms that could float to the air–liquid interface out competes other aerobes that cannot rise in a water column, through using up oxygen in the top layer.

In addition, gas vesicles can be used to maintain optimum salinity by positioning the organism in specific locations in a stratified body of water to prevent osmotic shock. High concentrations of solute will cause water to be drawn out of the cell by osmosis, causing cell lysis. The ability to synthesize gas vesicles is one of many strategies that allow halophilic organisms to tolerate environments with high salt content.

Gas vesicles are likely one of the most early mechanisms of motility among microscopic organisms due to the fact that it is the most widespread form of motility conserved within the genome of prokaryotes, some of which have evolved about 3 billion years ago.
Modes of active motility such as flagella movement require a mechanism that could convert chemical energy into mechanical energy, and thus is much more complex and would have evolved later. Functions of the gas vesicles are also largely conserved among species, although the mode of regulation might differ, suggesting the importance of gas vesicles as a form of motility. In certain organism such as enterobacterium "Serratia" sp. flagella-based motility and gas vesicle production are regulated oppositely by a single RNA binding protein, RsmA, suggesting alternate modes of environmental adaptation which would have developed into different taxons through regulation of the development between motility and flotation.

Although there is evidence suggesting the early evolution of gas vesicles, plasmid transfer serves as an alternate explanation of the widespread and conserved nature of the organelle. Cleavage of a plasmid in "Halobacterium halobium" resulted in the loss of the ability to biosynthesize gas vesicles, indicating the possibility of horizontal gene transfer, which could result in a transfer of the ability to produce gas vesicles among different strains of bacteria.

Gas vesicles are generally lemon-shaped or cylindrical, hollow tubes of protein with conical caps on both ends. The vesicles vary most in their diameter. Larger vesicles can hold more air and use less protein making them the most economic in terms of resource use, however, the larger a vesicle is the structurally weaker it is under pressure and the less pressure required before the vesicle would collapse. Organisms have evolved to be the most efficient with protein use and use the largest maximum vesicle diameter that will withstand the pressure the organism could be exposed to. In order for natural selection to have affected gas vesicles, the vesicles' diameter must be controlled by genetics.
Although genes encoding gas vesicles are found in many species of haloarchaea, only a few species produce them. The first Haloarchaeal gas vesicle gene, GvpA was cloned from Halobacterium sp. NRC-1. 14 genes are involved in forming gas vesicles in haloarchaea.

The first gas vesicle gene, GvpA was identified in Calothrix. There are at least two proteins that compose a cyanobacterium's gas vesicle: GvpA, and GvpC. GvpA forms ribs and much of the mass (up to 90%) of the main structure. GvpA is strongly hydrophobic and may be one of the most hydrophobic proteins known. GvpC is hydrophilic and helps to stabilize the structure by periodic inclusions into the GvpA ribs. GvpC is capable of being washed out of the vesicle and a consequential decreases in the vesicle's strength. The thickness of the vesicle's wall may range from 1.8–2.8 nm. The ribbed structure of the vesicle is evident on both inner and outer surfaces with a spacing of 4–5 nm between ribs. Vesicles may be 100–1400 nm long and 45–120 nm in diameter.

Within a species gas vesicle sizes are relatively uniform with a standard deviation of ±4%.

It appears that gas vesicles begin their existence as small biconical (two cones with the flat bases joined together) structures which enlarge to the specific diameter than grow and expand their length. It is unknown exactly what controls the diameter but it may be a molecule that interferes with GvpA or the shape of GvpA may change.

Formation of gas vesicles are regulated by two Gvp proteins: GvpD, which represses the expression of GvpA and GvpC proteins, and GvpE, which induces expression. Extracellular environmental factors also affect vesicle formation, either by regulating Gvp protein production or by directly disturbing the vesicle structure.

Light intensity has been found to affect gas vesicles production and maintenance differently between different bacteria and archaea. For "Anabaena flos-aquae", higher light intensities leads to vesicle collapse from an increase in turgor pressure and greater accumulation of photosynthetic products. In cyanobacteria, vesicle production decreases at high light intensity due to exposure of the bacterial surface to UV radiation, which can damage the bacterial genome.

Accumulation of glucose, maltose, or sucrose in "Haloferax mediterranei" and "Haloferax volcanii" were found to inhibit the expression of GvpA proteins and, therefore, a decrease of gas vesicle production. However, this only occurred at the cell's early exponential growth phase. Vesicle formation could also be induced in decreasing extracellular glucose concentrations.

A lack of oxygen was found to negatively affect gas vesicle formation in halophilic archaea. "Halobacterium salinarum" produce little or no vesicles under anaerobic conditions due to reduced synthesis of mRNA transcripts encoding for Gvp proteins. "H. mediterranei" and "H. volcanii" do not produce any vesicles under anoxic conditions due to a decrease in synthesized transcripts encoding for GvpA and truncated transcripts expressing GvpD.

Increased extracellular pH levels have been found to increase vesicle formation in Microcytis species. Under increased pH, levels of "gvpA" and "gvpC" transcripts increase, allowing more exposure to ribosomes for expression and leading to upregulation of Gvp proteins. It may be attributed to greater transcription of these genes, decreased decay of the synthesized transcripts or the higher stability of the mRNA.

Ultrasonic irradiation, at certain frequencies, was found to collapse gas vesicles in cyanobacteria "Spirulina platensis", preventing them from blooming.

In "enterobacterium; Serratia sp. strain ATCC39006", gas vesicle is produced only when there is sufficient concentration of a signalling molecule, N-acyl homoserine lactone.In this case, the quorum sensing molecule, N-acyl homoserine lactone acts as a morphogen initiating organelle development. This is advantageous to the organism as resources for gas vesicle production are utilized only when there is oxygen limitation caused by an increase in bacterial population.

Gas vesicle gene "gvp"C from "Halobacterium sp." is used as delivery system for vaccine studies.

Several characteristics of the protein encoded by the gas vesicle gene "gvp"C allow it to be used as carrier and adjuvant for antigens: it is stable, resistant to biological degradation, tolerates relatively high temperatures (up to 50 °C), and non-pathogenic to humans. Several antigens from various human pathogens have been recombined into the "gvp"C gene to create subunit vaccines with long-lasting immunologic responses.

Different genomic segments encoding for several "Chlamydia trachomatis" pathogen's proteins, including MOMP, OmcB, and PompD, are joined to the "gvp"C gene of "Halobacteria". "In vitro" assessments of cells show expression of the Chlamydia genes on cell surfaces through imagining techniques and show characteristic immunologic responses such as TLRs activities and pro-inflammatory cytokines production. Gas vesicle gene can be exploited as a delivery vehicle to generate a potential vaccine for Chlamydia. Limitations of this method include the need to minimize the damage of the GvpC protein itself while including as much of the vaccine target gene into the "gvp"C gene segment.

A similar experiment uses the same gas vesicle gene and "Salmonella enterica" pathogen's secreted inosine phosphate effector protein SopB4 and SopB5 to generate a potential vaccine vector. Immunized mice secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines IFN-γ, IL-2, and IL-9. Antibody IgG is also detected. After an infection challenge, none or significantly less amount of bacteria were found in the harvested organs such as the spleen and the liver. Potential vaccines using gas vesicle as an antigen display can be given via the mucosal route as an alternative administration pathway, increasing its accessibility to more people and eliciting a wider range of immune responses within the body.


</doc>
<doc id="26658925" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26658925" title="Eobacterium">
Eobacterium

Eobacterium is an extinct genus of bacteria from the Fig Tree Formation in Africa. It is about 3 billion years old, one of the oldest known living organisms. The discovery of "Eobacterium" and other Fig Tree organisms in the 1960s helped prove that life existed over three billion years ago.



</doc>
<doc id="1359750" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1359750" title="Slime layer">
Slime layer

A slime layer in bacteria is an easily removable (e.g. by centrifugation), unorganized layer of extracellular material that surrounds bacteria cells. Specifically, this consists mostly of exopolysaccharides, glycoproteins, and glycolipids. Therefore, the slime layer is considered as a form of glycocalyx.

The slime layer is not to be confused with the S-layer, a separate and highly organised glycoprotein layer surrounding many bacterial cells.

The function of the slime layer is to protect the bacteria cells from environmental dangers such as antibiotics and desiccation. The slime layer also allows bacteria to adhere to smooth surfaces such as prosthetic medical devices and catheters. It may permit bacterial colonies to survive chemical sterilization with chlorine, iodine, and other chemicals, leaving autoclaving or flushing with boiling water as the only certain methods of decontaminating.

A bacterial capsule is similar.



</doc>
<doc id="9619" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9619" title="Extremophile">
Extremophile

An extremophile (from Latin ' meaning "extreme" and Greek ' () meaning "love") is an organism with optimal growth in environmental conditions considered extreme in that it is challenging for a carbon-based life form with water as a solvent, such as all life on Earth, to survive.

This is not the same as a more anthropocentric and non-scientific view which considers an extremophile to be an organism that lives in environments uncomfortable to humans. In contrast, organisms that live in more moderate environmental conditions, according to an anthropocentric view, may be termed mesophiles or neutrophiles.

In the 1980s and 1990s, biologists found that microbial life has great flexibility for surviving in extreme environments—niches that are acidic or extraordinarily hot, for example—that would be completely inhospitable to complex organisms. Some scientists even concluded that life may have begun on Earth in hydrothermal vents far under the ocean's surface.

According to astrophysicist Steinn Sigurdsson, "There are viable bacterial spores that have been found that are 40 million years old on Earth—and we know they're very hardened to radiation." Some bacteria were found living in the cold and dark in a lake buried a half-mile deep under the ice in Antarctica, and in the Marianas Trench, the deepest place in Earth's oceans. Some microorganisms have been found thriving inside rocks up to below the sea floor under of ocean off the coast of the northwestern United States. According to one of the researchers, "You can find microbes everywhere—they're extremely adaptable to conditions, and survive wherever they are." A key to extremophile adaptation is their amino acid composition, affecting their protein folding ability under particular conditions.. Studying extreme environments on Earth can help researchers understand the limits of habitability on other worlds. 

Tom Gheysens from Ghent University in Belgium and some of his colleagues have presented research findings that show spores from a species of Bacillus bacteria survived and were still viable after being heated to temperatures of .

There are many classes of extremophiles that range all around the globe; each corresponding to the way its environmental niche differs from mesophilic conditions. These classifications are not exclusive. Many extremophiles fall under multiple categories and are classified as polyextremophiles. For example, organisms living inside hot rocks deep under Earth's surface are thermophilic and barophilic such as "Thermococcus barophilus". A polyextremophile living at the summit of a mountain in the Atacama Desert might be a radioresistant xerophile, a psychrophile, and an oligotroph. Polyextremophiles are well known for their ability to tolerate both high and low pH levels.


















Astrobiology is the study of the origin, evolution, distribution, and future of life in the universe: extraterrestrial life and life on Earth. Astrobiology makes use of physics, chemistry, astronomy, solar physics, biology, molecular biology, ecology, planetary science, geography, and geology to investigate the possibility of life on other worlds and help recognize biospheres that might be different from that on Earth. Astrobiologists are particularly interested in studying extremophiles, as it allows them to map what is known about the limits of life on Earth to potential extraterrestrial environments For example, analogous deserts of Antarctica are exposed to harmful UV radiation, low temperature, high salt concentration and low mineral concentration. These conditions are similar to those on Mars. Therefore, finding viable microbes in the subsurface of Antarctica suggests that there may be microbes surviving in endolithic communities and living under the Martian surface. Research indicates it is unlikely that Martian microbes exist on the surface or at shallow depths, but may be found at subsurface depths of around 100 meters.

Recent research carried out on extremophiles in Japan involved a variety of bacteria including "Escherichia coli" and "Paracoccus denitrificans" being subject to conditions of extreme gravity. The bacteria were cultivated while being rotated in an ultracentrifuge at high speeds corresponding to 403,627 g (i.e. 403,627 times the gravity experienced on Earth). "Paracoccus denitrificans" was one of the bacteria which displayed not only survival but also robust cellular growth under these conditions of hyperacceleration which are usually found only in cosmic environments, such as on very massive stars or in the shock waves of supernovas. Analysis showed that the small size of prokaryotic cells is essential for successful growth under hypergravity. The research has implications on the feasibility of panspermia.

On 26 April 2012, scientists reported that lichen survived and showed remarkable results on the adaptation capacity of photosynthetic activity within the simulation time of 34 days under Martian conditions in the Mars Simulation Laboratory (MSL) maintained by the German Aerospace Center (DLR).

On 29 April 2013, scientists at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, funded by NASA, reported that, during spaceflight on the International Space Station, microbes seem to adapt to the space environment in ways "not observed on Earth" and in ways that "can lead to increases in growth and virulence".

On 19 May 2014, scientists announced that numerous microbes, like "Tersicoccus phoenicis", may be resistant to methods usually used in spacecraft assembly clean rooms. It's not currently known if such resistant microbes could have withstood space travel and are present on the "Curiosity" rover now on the planet Mars.

On 20 August 2014, scientists confirmed the existence of microorganisms living half a mile below the ice of Antarctica.

On September 2015, scientists from CNR-National Research Council of Italy reported that "S.soflataricus" was able to survive under Martian radiation at a wavelength that was considered extremely lethal to most bacteria. This discovery is significant because it indicates that not only bacterial spores, but also growing cells can be remarkably resistant to strong UV radiation.

On June 2016, scientists from Brigham Young University conclusively reported that endospores of "Bacillus subtilis" were able to survive high speed impacts up to 299±28 m/s, extreme shock, and extreme deceleration. They pointed out that this feature might allow endospores to survive and to be transferred between planets by traveling within meteorites or by experiencing atmosphere disruption. Moreover, they suggested that the landing of spacecraft may also result in interplanetary spore transfer, given that spores can survive high-velocity impact while ejected from the spacecraft onto the planet surface. This is the first study which reported that bacteria can survive in such high-velocity impact. However, the lethal impact speed is unknown, and further experiments should be done by introducing higher-velocity impact to bacterial endospores.

New sub-types of -philes are identified frequently and the sub-category list for extremophiles is always growing. For example, microbial life lives in the liquid asphalt lake, Pitch Lake. Research indicates that extremophiles inhabit the asphalt lake in populations ranging between 10 to 10 cells/gram. Likewise, until recently boron tolerance was unknown but a strong borophile was discovered in bacteria. With the recent isolation of "Bacillus boroniphilus", borophiles came into discussion. Studying these borophiles may help illuminate the mechanisms of both boron toxicity and boron deficiency.

In July 2019, a scientific study of Kidd Mine in Canada discovered sulfur-breathing organisms which live 7900 feet below the surface, and which breathe sulfur in order to survive. These organisms are also remarkable due to eating rocks such as pyrite as their regular food source.

The thermoalkaliphilic catalase, which initiates the breakdown of hydrogen peroxide into oxygen and water, was isolated from an organism, "Thermus brockianus", found in Yellowstone National Park by Idaho National Laboratory researchers. The catalase operates over a temperature range from 30 °C to over 94 °C and a pH range from 6–10. This catalase is extremely stable compared to other catalases at high temperatures and pH. In a comparative study, the "T. brockianus" catalase exhibited a half life of 15 days at 80 °C and pH 10 while a catalase derived from "Aspergillus niger" had a half life of 15 seconds under the same conditions. The catalase will have applications for removal of hydrogen peroxide in industrial processes such as pulp and paper bleaching, textile bleaching, food pasteurization, and surface decontamination of food packaging.

DNA modifying enzymes such as "Taq" DNA polymerase and some "Bacillus" enzymes used in clinical diagnostics and starch liquefaction are produced commercially by several biotechnology companies.

Over 65 prokaryotic species are known to be naturally competent for genetic transformation, the ability to transfer DNA from one cell to another cell followed by integration of the donor DNA into the recipient cell's chromosome. Several extremophiles are able to carry out species-specific DNA transfer, as described below. However, it is not yet clear how common such a capability is among extremophiles.

The bacterium "Deinococcus radiodurans" is one of the most radioresistant organisms known. This bacterium can also survive cold, dehydration, vacuum and acid and is thus known as a polyextremophile. "D. radiodurans" is competent to perform genetic transformation. Recipient cells are able to repair DNA damage in donor transforming DNA that had been UV irradiated as efficiently as they repair cellular DNA when the cells themselves are irradiated. The extreme thermophilic bacterium "Thermus thermophilus" and other related "Thermus" species are also capable of genetic transformation.

"Halobacterium volcanii", an extreme halophilic (saline tolerant) archaeon, is capable of natural genetic transformation. Cytoplasmic bridges are formed between cells that appear to be used for DNA transfer from one cell to another in either direction.

"Sulfolobus solfataricus" and "Sulfolobus acidocaldarius" are hyperthermophilic archaea. Exposure of these organisms to the DNA damaging agents UV irradiation, bleomycin or mitomycin C induces species-specific cellular aggregation. UV-induced cellular aggregation of "S. acidocaldarius" mediates chromosomal marker exchange with high frequency. Recombination rates exceed those of uninduced cultures by up to three orders of magnitude. Frols et al. and Ajon et al. hypothesized that cellular aggregation enhances species-specific DNA transfer between "Sulfolobus" cells in order to repair damaged DNA by means of homologous recombination. Van Wolferen et al. noted that this DNA exchange process may be crucial under DNA damaging conditions such as high temperatures. It has also been suggested that DNA transfer in "Sulfolobus" may be an early form of sexual interaction similar to the more well-studied bacterial transformation systems that involve species-specific DNA transfer leading to homologous recombinational repair of DNA damage (and see Transformation (genetics)).

Extracellular membrane vesicles (MVs) might be involved in DNA transfer between different hyperthermophilic archaeal species. It has been shown that both plasmids and viral genomes can be transferred via MVs. Notably, a horizontal plasmid transfer has been documented between hyperthermophilic "Thermococcus" and "Methanocaldococcus" species, respectively belonging to the orders "Thermococcales" and "Methanococcales".





</doc>
<doc id="50529615" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50529615" title="Merodiploid">
Merodiploid

A merodiploid is a partially diploid bacterium, which has its own chromosome complement and a chromosome fragment introduced by conjugation, transformation or transduction. It can also be defined as an essentially haploid organism that carries a second copy of a part of its genome. The term is derived from the Greek, meros = part, and was originally used to describe both unstable partial diploidy, such as that which occurs briefly in recipients after mating with an Hfr strain (1), and the stable state, exemplified by F-prime strains (see Hfr'S And F-Primes). Over time the usage has tended to confine the term to descriptions of stable genetic states. Merodiploidy refers to the partial duplication of chromosomes in a haploid organism.


</doc>
<doc id="50533361" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50533361" title="Fluctuation spectrum">
Fluctuation spectrum

Fluctuation spectra are commonly denoted by sets of physical phenomena such as hydrodynamic turbulence, the collective behaviour of bacteria and more generally fluctuations originating from the equilibrium state. All of these phenomena can be generalised by a few theoretical results that qualitatively describe these non-equilibrium steady states. A common example of this is the derivation of the force exerted by a non-equilibrium system on two embedded walls. It is characteristic of a narrow, unimodal spectrum for the force to be dependent on the width and peak within a fluctuation spectrum, which oscillates between repulsion and attraction.

Some common generalisations of this theory can be applied to the Maritime Casimir Effect and through the motion of active Brownian particles within a closed system. Examples of active non-equilibrium systems can be demonstrated through many chemical, physical and biological processes; which range from turbulence, mechanical driving, chemical bonding, chemical gradients and cosmic background radiation.


</doc>
<doc id="50925207" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50925207" title="Uterine microbiome">
Uterine microbiome

The uterine microbiome is the commensal, nonpathogenic, bacteria, viruses, yeasts/fungi present in a healthy uterus, amniotic fluid and endometrium and the specific environment which they inhabit. It has been only recently confirmed that the uterus and its tissues are not sterile. Due to improved 16S rRNA gene sequencing techniques, detection of bacteria that are present in low numbers is possible.
Using this procedure that allows the detection of bacteria that cannot be cultured outside the body, studies of microbiota present in the uterus are expected to increase.

Evidence shows that the presence of uterine 16S rRNA is not only the result of sampling or analysis errors and deserves to be acknowledged.Concept of the sterile endometrium, and the uterine compartment in general, is outworn, although the true core uterine microbiome still needs to be assessed. Functional studies are needed to elucidate the physiological importance of the microbiome in fertility. The challenge of studying reproductive immunology and the microbiota involved is that research on all of the different aspects is still in its infancy; microbiome, immunity, endocrinology in pregnancy,
and placental and fetal development need to be studied together to obtain a more comprehensive overview. 

Bacteria, viruses and one genus of yeasts are a normal part of the uterus before and during pregnancy. The uterus has been found to possess its own characteristic microbiome that differs significantly from the vaginal microbiome. Despite its close spatial connection with the vagina, the microbiome of the uterus more closely resembles the commensal bacteria found in the oral cavity. 
In addition, the immune system is able to differentiate between those bacteria normally found in the uterus and those that are pathogenic. Hormonal changes have an effect on the microbiota of the uterus.

The organisms listed below have been identified as commensals in the healthy uterus. Some also have the potential for growing to the point of causing disease:

Other taxa can be present, without causing disease or an immune response. Their presence is associated with negative birth outcomes.

Prophylactic antibiotics have been injected into the uterus to treat infertility. This has been done before the transfer of embryos with the intent to improve implantation rates. No association exists between successful implantation and antibiotic treatment. Infertility treatments often progress to the point where a microbiological analysis of the uterine microbiota is performed. Preterm birth is associated with certain species of bacteria that are not normally part of the healthy uterine microbiome.

The immune response becomes more pronounced when bacteria are found that are not commensal.

Investigations into reproductive-associated microbiomes began around 1885 by Theodor Escherich. He wrote that meconium from the newborn was free of bacteria. There was a general consensus at the time and even recently that the uterus was sterile and this was referred to as the "sterile womb paradigm." Other investigations used sterile diapers for meconium collection. No bacteria were able to be cultured from the samples. Other studies showed that bacteria were detected and were directly proportional to the time between birth and the passage of meconium.

Investigations into the role of the uterine microbiome in the development of the infant microbiome are ongoing.


</doc>
<doc id="52084528" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52084528" title="Cryomorphaceae">
Cryomorphaceae

Cryomorphaceae is a family of bacteria in the order Flavobacteriales which occur in marine habitats.



</doc>
<doc id="52121222" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52121222" title="Dyadobacter">
Dyadobacter

Dyadobacter is a genus of gram negative rod-shaped bacteria belonging to the family Cytophagaceae in the phylum Bacteroidetes. Typical traits of the genus include yellow colony colour, positive flexirubin test and non-motile behaviours. They possess an anaerobic metabolism (oxidase positive), can utilise a broad range of carbon sources, and test positive for peroxide catalase activity. The type species is "Dyadobacter fermentans", which was isolated from surface sterilised maize leaves, (apparently named after its ability to ferment glucose and fructose).

Species of "Dyadobacter" have been isolated from a diverse range of environments worldwide, including glacial ice, seawater and factories, however a large number of the currently described species belonging to the genus "Dyadobacter" have been isolated from soil communities. Several studies observing the microbiome associated with plants have identified "Dyadobacter" species. These studies have recognized "Dyadobacter" strains from microbiomes of corn, potato, canola, wheat and "Arabidopsis thaliana". In some cases, "Dyadobacter" isolates have been shown to be one of the major cohorts of bacteria on plant phyllospheres. It is currently unknown what role "Dyadobacter" species play in these plant-associated communities.

Several species of "Dyadobacter" have been identified as potentially useful in bioremediation. "Dyadobacter beijingensis" was identified in a hydrocarbonoclastic community of bacteria remediating soil contaminated with crude oil, and Strains of "D. fermentans" have been observed degrading 7,8-Benzoquinoline, an azaarene with mutagenic properties.


</doc>
<doc id="35629150" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=35629150" title="Bacterial genome">
Bacterial genome

Bacterial genomes are generally smaller and less variant in size among species when compared with genomes of eukaryotes. Bacterial genomes can range in size anywhere from about 130 kbp to over 14 Mbp. A study that included, but was not limited to, 478 bacterial genomes, concluded that as genome size increases, the number of genes increases at a disproportionately slower rate in eukaryotes than in non-eukaryotes. Thus, the proportion of non-coding DNA goes up with genome size more quickly in non-bacteria than in bacteria. This is consistent with the fact that most eukaryotic nuclear DNA is non-gene coding, while the majority of prokaryotic, viral, and organellar genes are coding.
Right now, we have genome sequences from 50 different bacterial phyla and 11 different archaeal phyla. Second-generation sequencing has yielded many draft genomes (close to 90% of bacterial genomes in GenBank are currently not complete); third-generation sequencing might eventually yield a complete genome in a few hours. The genome sequences reveal much diversity in bacteria. Analysis of over 2000 "Escherichia coli" genomes reveals an "E. coli" core genome of about 3100 gene families and a total of about 89,000 different gene families. Genome sequences show that parasitic bacteria have 500–1200 genes, free-living bacteria have 1500–7500 genes, and archaea have 1500–2700 genes. A striking discovery by Cole et al. described massive amounts of gene decay when comparing Leprosy bacillus to ancestral bacteria. Studies have since shown that several bacteria have smaller genome sizes than their ancestors did. Over the years, researchers have proposed several theories to explain the general trend of bacterial genome decay and the relatively small size of bacterial genomes. Compelling evidence indicates that the apparent degradation of bacterial genomes is owed to a deletional bias.

As of 2014, there are over 30,000 sequenced bacterial genomes publicly available and thousands of metagenome projects. Projects such as the Genomic Encyclopedia of Bacteria and Archaea (GEBA) intend to add more genomes.

The single gene comparison is now being supplanted by more general methods. These methods have resulted in novel perspectives on genetic relationships that previously have only been estimated.

A significant achievement in the second decade of bacterial genome sequencing was the production of metagenomic data, which covers all DNA present in a sample. Previously, there were only two metagenomic projects published.

Bacteria possess a compact genome architecture distinct from eukaryotes in two important ways: bacteria show a strong correlation between genome size and number of functional genes in a genome, and those genes are structured into operons. The main reason for the relative density of bacterial genomes compared to eukaryotic genomes (especially multicellular eukaryotes) is the presence of noncoding DNA in the form of intergenic regions and introns. Some notable exceptions include recently formed pathogenic bacteria. This was initially described in a study by Cole "et al". in which "Mycobacterium leprae" was discovered to have a significantly higher percentage of pseudogenes to functional genes (~40%) than its free-living ancestors.

Furthermore, amongst species of bacteria, there is relatively little variation in genome size when compared with the genome sizes of other major groups of life. Genome size is of little relevance when considering the number of functional genes in eukaryotic species. In bacteria, however, the strong correlation between the number of genes and the genome size makes the size of bacterial genomes an interesting topic for research and discussion.

The general trends of bacterial evolution indicate that bacteria started as free-living organisms. Evolutionary paths led some bacteria to become pathogens and symbionts. The lifestyles of bacteria play an integral role in their respective genome sizes. Free-living bacteria have the largest genomes out of the three types of bacteria; however, they have fewer pseudogenes than bacteria that have recently acquired pathogenicity.

Facultative and recently evolved pathogenic bacteria exhibit a smaller genome size than free-living bacteria, yet they have more pseudogenes than any other form of bacteria.

Obligate bacterial symbionts or pathogens have the smallest genomes and the fewest pseudogenes of the three groups. The relationship between life-styles of bacteria and genome size raises questions as to the mechanisms of bacterial genome evolution. Researchers have developed several theories to explain the patterns of genome size evolution amongst bacteria.

As single-gene comparisons have largely given way to genome comparisons, phylogeny of bacterial genomes have improved in accuracy. The Average Nucleotide Identity method quantifies genetic distance between entire genomes by taking advantage of regions of about 10,000 bp. With enough data from genomes of one genus, algorithms are executed to categorize species. This has been done for the "Pseudomonas avellanae" species in 2013.

To extract information about bacterial genomes, core- and pan-genome sizes have been assessed for several strains of bacteria. In 2012, the number of core gene families was about 3000. However, by 2015, with an over tenfold increased in available genomes, the pan-genome has increased as well. There is roughly a positive correlation between the number of genomes added and the growth of the pan-genome. On the other hand, the core genome has remain static since 2012. Currently, the "E. coli" pan-genome is composed of about 90,000 gene families. About one-third of these exist only in a single genome. Many of these, however, are merely gene fragments and the result of calling errors. Still, there are probably over 60,000 unique gene families in "E. coli".

Bacteria lose a large amount of genes as they transition from free-living or facultatively parasitic life cycles to permanent host-dependent life. Towards the lower end of the scale of bacterial genome size are the mycoplasmas and related bacteria. Early molecular phylogenetic studies revealed that mycoplasmas represented an evolutionary derived state, contrary to prior hypotheses. Furthermore, it is now known that mycoplasmas are just one instance of many of genome shrinkage in obligately host-associated bacteria. Other examples are "Rickettsia", "Buchnera aphidicola", and "Borrelia burgdorferi".

Small genome size in such species is associated with certain particularities, such as rapid evolution of polypeptide sequences and low GC content in the genome. The convergent evolution of these qualities in unrelated bacteria suggests that an obligate association with a host promotes genome reduction.

Given that over 80% of almost all of the fully sequenced bacterial genomes consist of intact ORFs, and that gene length is nearly constant at ~1 kb per gene, it is inferred that small genomes have few metabolic capabilities. While free-living bacteria, such as "E. coli", "Salmonella" species, or "Bacillus" species, usually have 1500 to 6000 proteins encoded in their DNA, obligately pathogenic bacteria often have as few as 500 to 1000 such proteins.

One candidate explanation is that reduced genomes maintain genes that are necessary for vital processes pertaining to cellular growth and replication, in addition to those genes that are required to survive in the bacteria's ecological niche. However, sequence data contradicts this hypothesis. The set of universal orthologs amongst eubacteria comprises only 15% of each genome. Thus, each lineage has taken a different evolutionary path to reduced size. Because universal cellular processes require over 80 genes, variation in genes imply that the same functions can be achieved by exploitation of nonhomologous genes.

Host-dependent bacteria are able to secure many compounds required for metabolism from the host's cytoplasm or tissue. They can, in turn, discard their own biosynthetic pathways and associated genes. This removal explains many of the specific gene losses. For example, the "Rickettsia" species, which relies on specific energy substrate from its host, has lost many of its native energy metabolism genes. Similarly, most small genomes have lost their amino acid biosynthesizing genes, as these are found in the host instead. One exception is the "Buchnera", an obligate maternally transmitted symbiont of aphids. It retains 54 genes for biosynthesis of crucial amino acids, but no longer has pathways for those amino acids that the host can synthesize. Pathways for nucleotide biosynthesis are gone from many reduced genomes. Those anabolic pathways that evolved through niche adaptation remain in particular genomes.

The hypothesis that unused genes are eventually removed does not explain why many of the removed genes would indeed remain helpful in obligate pathogens. For example, many eliminated genes code for products that are involved in universal cellular processes, including replication, transcription, and translation. Even genes supporting DNA recombination and repair are deleted from every small genome. In addition, small genomes have fewer tRNAs, utilizing one for several amino acids. So, a single codon pairs with multiple codons, which likely yields less-than-optimal translation machinery. It is unknown why obligate intracellular pathogens would benefit by retaining fewer tRNAs and fewer DNA repair enzymes.

Another factor to consider is the change in population that corresponds to an evolution towards an obligately pathogenic life. Such a shift in lifestyle often results in a reduction in the genetic population size of a lineage, since there is a finite number of hosts to occupy. This genetic drift may result in fixation of mutations that inactivate otherwise beneficial genes, or otherwise may decrease the efficiency of gene products. Hence, not will only useless genes be lost (as mutations disrupt them once the bacteria has settled into host dependency), but also beneficial genes may be lost if genetic drift enforces ineffective purifying selection.

The number of universally maintained genes is small and inadequate for independent cellular growth and replication, so that small genome species must achieve such feats by means of varying genes. This is done partly through nonorthologous gene displacement. That is, the role of one gene is replaced by another gene that achieves the same function. Redundancy within the ancestral, larger genome is eliminated. The descendant small genome content depends on the content of chromosomal deletions that occur in the early stages of genome reduction.

The very small genome of "M. genitalium" possesses dispensable genes. In a study in which single genes of this organism were inactivated using transposon-mediated mutagenesis, at least 129 of its 484 ORGs were not required for growth. A much smaller genome than that of the "M. genitalium" is therefore feasible.

One theory predicts that bacteria have smaller genomes due to a selective pressure on genome size to ensure faster replication. The theory is based upon the logical premise that smaller bacterial genomes will take less time to replicate. Subsequently, smaller genomes will be selected preferentially due to enhanced fitness. A study done by Mira et al. indicated little to no correlation between genome size and doubling time. The data indicates that selection is not a suitable explanation for the small sizes of bacterial genomes. Still, many researchers believe there is some selective pressure on bacteria to maintain small genome size.

Selection is but one process involved in evolution. Two other major processes (mutation and genetic drift) can account for the genome sizes of various types of bacteria. A study done by Mira et al. examined the size of insertions and deletions in bacterial pseudogenes. Results indicated that mutational deletions tend to be larger than insertions in bacteria in the absence of gene transfer or gene duplication. Insertions caused by horizontal or lateral gene transfer and gene duplication tend to involve transfer of large amounts of genetic material. Assuming a lack of these processes, genomes will tend to reduce in size in the absence of selective constraint. Evidence of a deletional bias is present in the respective genome sizes of free-living bacteria, facultative and recently derived parasites and obligate parasites and symbionts.

Free-living bacteria tend to have large population-sizes and are subject to more opportunity for gene transfer. As such, selection can effectively operate on free-living bacteria to remove deleterious sequences resulting in a relatively small number of pseudogenes. Continually, further selective pressure is evident as free-living bacteria must produce all gene-products independent of a host. Given that there is sufficient opportunity for gene transfer to occur and there are selective pressures against even slightly deleterious deletions, it is intuitive that free-living bacteria should have the largest bacterial genomes of all bacteria types.

Recently-formed parasites undergo severe bottlenecks and can rely on host environments to provide gene products. As such, in recently-formed and facultative parasites, there is an accumulation of pseudogenes and transposable elements due to a lack of selective pressure against deletions. The population bottlenecks reduce gene transfer and as such, deletional bias ensures the reduction of genome size in parasitic bacteria.

Obligatory parasites and symbionts have the smallest genome sizes due to prolonged effects of deletional bias. Parasites which have evolved to occupy specific niches are not exposed to much selective pressure. As such, genetic drift dominates the evolution of niche-specific bacteria. Extended exposure to deletional bias ensures the removal of most superfluous sequences. Symbionts occur in drastically lower numbers and undergo the most severe bottlenecks of any bacterial type. There is almost no opportunity for gene transfer for endosymbiotic bacteria, and thus genome compaction can be extreme. One of the smallest bacterial genomes ever to be sequenced is that of the endosymbiont "Carsonella rudii".
At 160 kbp, the genome of "Carsonella" is one of the most streamlined examples of a genome examined to date.

Molecular phylogenetics has revealed that every clade of bacteria with genome sizes under 2 Mb was derived from ancestors with much larger genomes, thus refuting the hypothesis that bacteria evolved by the successive doubling of small-genomed ancestors.
Recent studies performed by Nilsson et al. examined the rates of bacterial genome reduction of obligate bacteria. Bacteria were cultured introducing frequent bottlenecks and growing cells in serial passage to reduce gene transfer so as to mimic conditions of endosymbiotic bacteria. The data predicted that bacteria exhibiting a one-day generation time lose as many as 1,000 kbp in as few as 50,000 years (a relatively short evolutionary time period). Furthermore, after deleting genes essential to the methyl-directed DNA mismatch repair (MMR) system, it was shown that bacterial genome size reduction increased in rate by as much as 50 times. These results indicate that genome size reduction can occur relatively rapidly, and loss of certain genes can speed up the process of bacterial genome compaction.

This is not to suggest that all bacterial genomes are reducing in size and complexity. While many types of bacteria have reduced in genome size from an ancestral state, there are still a huge number of bacteria that maintained or increased genome size over ancestral states. Free-living bacteria experience huge population sizes, fast generation times and a relatively high potential for gene transfer. While deletional bias tends to remove unnecessary sequences, selection can operate significantly amongst free-living bacteria resulting in evolution of new genes and processes.

Unlike eukaryotes, which evolve mainly through the modification of existing genetic information, bacteria have acquired a large percentage of their genetic diversity by the horizontal transfer of genes. This creates quite dynamic genomes, in which DNA can be introduced into and removed from the chromosome.

Bacteria have more variation in their metabolic properties, cellular structures, and lifestyles than can be accounted for by point mutations alone. For example, none of the phenotypic traits that distinguish "E. coli" from "Salmonella enterica" can be attributed to point mutation. On the contrary, evidence suggests that horizontal gene transfer has bolstered the diversification and speciation of many bacteria.

Horizontal gene transfer is often detected via DNA sequence information. DNA segments obtained by this mechanism often reveal a narrow phylogenetic distribution between related species. Furthermore, these regions sometimes display an unexpected level of similarity to genes from taxa that are assumed to be quite divergent.

Although gene comparisons and phylogenetic studies are helpful in investigating horizontal gene transfer, the DNA sequences of genes are even more revelatory of their origin and ancestry within a genome. Bacterial species differ widely in overall GC content, although the genes in any one species' genome are roughly identical with respect to base composition, patterns of codon usage, and frequencies of di- and trinucleotides. As a result, sequences that are newly acquired through lateral transfer can be identified via their characteristics, which remains that of the donor. For example, many of the "S. enterica" genes that are not present in "E. coli" have base compositions that differ from the overall 52% GC content of the entire chromosome. Within this species, some lineages have more than a megabase of DNA that is not present in other lineages. The base compositions of these lineage-specific sequences imply that at least half of these sequences were captured through lateral transfer. Furthermore, the regions adjacent to horizontally obtained genes often have remnants of translocatable elements, transfer origins of plasmids, or known attachment sites of phage integrases.

In some species, a large proportion of laterally transferred genes originate from plasmid-, phage-, or transposon-related sequences.

Although sequence-based methods reveal the prevalence of horizontal gene transfer in bacteria, the results tend to be underestimates of the magnitude of this mechanism, since sequences obtained from donors whose sequence characteristics are similar to those of the recipient will avoid detection.

Comparisons of completely sequenced genomes confirm that bacterial chromosomes are amalgams of ancestral and laterally acquired sequences. The hyperthermophilic Eubacteria "Aquifex aeolicus" and "Thermotoga maritima" each has many genes that are similar in protein sequence to homologues in thermophilic Archaea. 24% of "Thermotoga's" 1,877 ORFs and 16% of "Aquifex's" 1,512 ORFs show high matches to an Archaeal protein, while mesophiles such as "E. coli" and "B. subtilis" have far lesser proportions of genes that are most like Archaeal homologues.

The genesis of new abilities due to horizontal gene transfer has three requirements. First, there must exist a possible route for the donor DNA to be accepted by the recipient cell. Additionally, the obtained sequence must be integrated with the rest of the genome. Finally, these integrated genes must benefit the recipient bacterial organism. The first two steps can be achieved via three mechanisms: transformation, transduction and conjugation.

Transformation involves the uptake of named DNA from the environment. Through transformation, DNA can be transmitted between distantly related organisms. Some bacterial species, such as "Haemophilus influenzae" and "Neisseria gonorrhoeae", are continuously competent to accept DNA. Other species, such as "Bacillus subtilis" and "Streptococcus pneumoniae", become competent when they enter a particular phase in their lifecycle. 
Transformation in "N. gonorrhoeae" and "H. influenzae" is effective only if particular recognition sequences are found in the recipient genomes (5'-GCCGTCTGAA-3' and 5'-AAGTGCGGT-3'. respectively). Although the existence of certain uptake sequences improve transformation capability between related species, many of the inherently competent bacterial species, such as "B. subtilis" and "S. pneumoniae", do not display sequence preference.

New genes may be introduced into bacteria by a bacteriophage that has replicated within a donor through generalized transduction or specialized transduction. The amount of DNA that can be transmitted in one event is constrained by the size of the phage capsid (although the upper limit is about 100 kilobases). While phages are numerous in the environment, the range of microorganisms that can be transduced depends on receptor recognition by the bacteriophage. Transduction does not require both donor and recipient cells to be present simultaneously in time nor space. Phage-encoded proteins both mediate the transfer of DNA into the recipient cytoplasm and assist integration of DNA into the chromosome.

Conjugation involves physical contact between donor and recipient cells and is able to mediate transfers of genes between domains, such as between bacteria and yeast. DNA is transmitted from donor to recipient either by self-transmissible or mobilizable plasmid. Conjugation may mediate the transfer of chromosomal sequences by plasmids that integrate into the chromosome.

Despite the multitude of mechanisms mediating gene transfer among bacteria, the process's success is not guaranteed unless the received sequence is stably maintained in the recipient. DNA integration can be sustained through one of many processes. One is persistence as an episome, another is homologous recombination, and still another is illegitimate incorporation through lucky double-strand break repair.

Antimicrobial resistance genes grant an organism the ability to grow its ecological niche, since it can now survive in the presence of previously lethal compounds. As the benefit to a bacterium earned from receiving such genes are time- and space-independent, those sequences that are highly mobile are selected for. Plasmids are quite mobilizable between taxa and are the most frequent way by which bacteria acquire antibiotic resistance genes.

Adoption of a pathogenic lifestyle often yields a fundamental shift in an organism's ecological niche. The erratic phylogenetic distribution of pathogenic organisms implies that bacterial virulence is a consequence of the presence, or obtainment of, genes that are missing in avirulent forms. Evidence of this includes the discovery of large 'virulence' plasmids in pathogenic "Shigella" and "Yersinia", as well as the ability to bestow pathogenic properties onto "E. coli" via experimental exposure to genes from other species.

In April 2019, scientists at ETH Zurich reported the creation of the world's first bacterial genome, named "Caulobacter ethensis-2.0", made entirely by a computer, although a related viable form of "C. ethensis-2.0" does not yet exist.



</doc>
<doc id="54194344" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54194344" title="Non-motile bacteria">
Non-motile bacteria

Non-motile bacteria are those bacterial species that lack the ability and structures that would allow them to propel themselves, under their own power, through their environment. When non-motile bacteria are cultured in a stab tube, they only grow along the stab line. If the bacteria are mobile, the line will appear diffuse and extend into the medium. The cell structures that provide the ability for locomotion are the cilia and flagella. Coliform and Streptococci are examples of non-motile bacteria as are "Klebsiella pneumoniae", and "Yersinia pestis". Motility is one characteristic used in the identification of bacteria and evidence of possessing structures: peritrichous flagella, polar flagella and/or a combination of both.

Though the lack of motility might be regarded a disadvantage, some non-motile bacteria possess structures that allow their attachment to eukaryotic cells, like GI mucousal cells.

Vancomycin resistant Enterococcus spp. are non-motile while vancomycin susceptible Enterococcus spp. Some genera have been divided based upon the presence or absence of motility. Motility is determined by using a motility medium. The ingredients include motility test medium, nutrient broth powder, NaCl and distilled water. An inoculating needle (not a loop) is used to insert the bacterial sample. The needle is inserted through the medium for a length of one inch. The media tube incubated at . Bacteria that are motile grow away from the stab, and toward the sides and downward toward the bottom of the tube. Growth should be observed in 24 to 48 hours. With some species, the bacterium is inconsistent related to its motility.


</doc>
<doc id="19456032" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=19456032" title="Microbiota">
Microbiota

Microbiota are "ecological communities of commensal, symbiotic and pathogenic microorganisms" found in and on all multicellular organisms studied to date from plants to animals. Microbiota includes bacteria, archaea, protists, fungi and viruses. Microbiota have been found to be crucial for immunologic, hormonal and metabolic homeostasis of their host.
The synonymous term microbiome describes either the collective genomes of the microorganisms that reside in an environmental niche or the microorganisms themselves.

The microbiome and host emerged during evolution as a synergistic unit from epigenetics and genetic characteristics, sometimes collectively referred to as a holobiont.

All plants and animals, from simple life forms to humans, live in close association with microbial organisms. Several advances have driven the perception of microbiomes, including:


Biologists have come to appreciate that microbes make up an important part of an organism's phenotype, far beyond the occasional symbiotic case study.

Commensalism, a concept developed by Pierre-Joseph van Beneden (1809-1894), a Belgian professor at the University of Louvain during the nineteenth century is central to the microbiome, where microbiota colonize a host in a non-harmful coexistence. The relationship with their host is called mutualistic when organisms perform tasks that are known to be useful for the host, parasitic, when disadvantageous to the host. Other authors define a situation as mutualistic where both benefit, and commensal, where the unaffected host benefits the symbiont. A nutrient exchange may be bidirectional or unidirectional, may be context dependent and may occur in diverse ways. Microbiota that are expected to be present, and that under normal circumstances do not cause disease, are deemed "normal flora" or "normal microbiota"; normal flora can not only be harmless, but can be protective of the host.

The initial acquisition of microbiota in animals from mammalians to marine sponges is at birth, and may even occur through the germ cell line. In plants, the colonizing process can be initiated below ground in the root zone, around the germinating seed, the spermosphere, or originate from the above ground parts, the phyllosphere and the flower zone or anthosphere. The stability of the rhizosphere microbiota over generations depends upon the plant type but even more on the soil composition, i.e. living and non living environment. Clinically, new microbiota can be acquired through fecal microbiota transplant to treat infections such as chronic "C. difficile" infection. 

Consensus exists among evolutionary biologists that one should not separate an organism's genes from the context of its resident microbes.

The human microbiota includes bacteria, fungi, archaea and viruses. Micro-animals which live on the human body are excluded. The human microbiome refers to their genomes.

Humans are colonized by many microorganisms; the traditional estimate was that humans live with ten times more non-human cells than human cells; more recent estimates have lowered this to 3:1 and even to about 1:1.

The Human Microbiome Project sequenced the genome of the human microbiota, focusing particularly on the microbiota that normally inhabit the skin, mouth, nose, digestive tract, and vagina. It reached a milestone in 2012 when it published initial results.



The symbiotic relationship between a host and its microbiota is under laboratory research for how it may shape the immune system of mammals. In many animals, the immune system and microbiota may engage in "cross-talk" by exchanging chemical signals, which may enable the microbiota to influence immune reactivity and targeting. Bacteria can be transferred from mother to child through direct contact and after birth. As the infant microbiome is established, commensal bacteria quickly populate the gut, prompting a range of immune responses and "programming" the immune system with long-lasting effects. The bacteria are able to stimulate lymphoid tissue associated with the gut mucosa, which enables the tissue to produce antibodies for pathogens that may enter the gut.

The human microbiome may play a role in the activation of toll-like receptors in the intestines, a type of pattern recognition receptor host cells use to recognize dangers and repair damage. Pathogens can influence this coexistence leading to immune dysregulation including and susceptibility to diseases, mechanisms of inflammation, immune tolerance, and autoimmune diseases.

Organisms evolve within ecosystems so that the change of one organism affects the change of others. The hologenome theory of evolution proposes that an object of natural selection is not the individual organism, but the organism together with its associated organisms, including its microbial communities.

Coral reefs. The hologenome theory originated in studies on coral reefs. Coral reefs are the largest structures created by living organisms, and contain abundant and highly complex microbial communities. Over the past several decades, major declines in coral populations have occurred. Climate change, water pollution and over-fishing are three stress factors that have been described as leading to disease susceptibility. Over twenty different coral diseases have been described, but of these, only a handful have had their causative agents isolated and characterized. Coral bleaching is the most serious of these diseases. In the Mediterranean Sea, the bleaching of "Oculina patagonica" was first described in 1994 and shortly determined to be due to infection by Vibrio shiloi. From 1994 to 2002, bacterial bleaching of "O. patagonica" occurred every summer in the eastern Mediterranean. Surprisingly, however, after 2003, "O. patagonica" in the eastern Mediterranean has been resistant to "V. shiloi" infection, although other diseases still cause bleaching. The surprise stems from the knowledge that corals are long lived, with lifespans on the order of decades, and do not have adaptive immune systems. Their innate immune systems do not produce antibodies, and they should seemingly not be able to respond to new challenges except over evolutionary time scales.

The puzzle of how corals managed to acquire resistance to a specific pathogen led to a 2007 proposal, that a dynamic relationship exists between corals and their symbiotic microbial communities. It is thought that by altering its composition, the holobiont can adapt to changing environmental conditions far more rapidly than by genetic mutation and selection alone. Extrapolating this hypothesis to other organisms, including higher plants and animals, led to the proposal of the hologenome theory of evolution.

A major criticism has been the claim that "V. shiloi" was misidentified as the causative agent of coral bleaching, and that its presence in bleached "O. patagonica" was simply that of opportunistic colonization. If this is true, the basic observation leading to the theory would be invalid. The theory has gained significant popularity as a way of explaining rapid changes in adaptation that cannot otherwise be explained by traditional mechanisms of natural selection. Within the hologenome theory, the holobiont has not only become the principal unit of natural selection but also the result of other step of integration that it is also observed at the cell (symbiogenesis, endosymbiosis) and genomic levels.

Targeted amplicon sequencing relies on having some expectations about the composition of the community that is being studied. In target amplicon sequencing a phylogenetically informative marker is targeted for sequencing. Such a marker should be present in ideally all the expected organisms. It should also evolve in such a way that it is conserved enough that primers can target genes from a wide range of organisms while evolving quickly enough to allow for finer resolution at the taxonomic level. A common marker for human microbiome studies is the gene for bacterial 16S rRNA ("i.e." "16S rDNA", the sequence of DNA which encodes the ribosomal RNA molecule). Since ribosomes are present in all living organisms, using 16S rDNA allows for DNA to be amplified from many more organisms than if another marker were used. The 16S rDNA gene contains both slowly evolving regions and fast evolving regions; the former can be used to design broad primers while the latter allow for finer taxonomic distinction. However, species-level resolution is not typically possible using the 16S rDNA. Primer selection is an important step, as anything that cannot be targeted by the primer will not be amplified and thus will not be detected. Different sets of primers have been shown to amplify different taxonomic groups due to sequence variation.

Targeted studies of eukaryotic and viral communities are limited and subject to the challenge of excluding host DNA from amplification and the reduced eukaryotic and viral biomass in the human microbiome.

After the amplicons are sequenced, molecular phylogenetic methods are used to infer the composition of the microbial community. This is done by clustering the amplicons into operational taxonomic units (OTUs) and inferring phylogenetic relationships between the sequences. Due to the complexity of the data, distance measures such as UniFrac distances are usually defined between microbiome samples, and downstream multivariate methods are carried out on the distance matrices. An important point is that the scale of data is extensive, and further approaches must be taken to identify patterns from the available information. Tools used to analyze the data include VAMPS, QIIME and mothur.

Metagenomics is also used extensively for studying microbial communities. In metagenomic sequencing, DNA is recovered directly from environmental samples in an untargeted manner with the goal of obtaining an unbiased sample from all genes of all members of the community. Recent studies use shotgun Sanger sequencing or pyrosequencing to recover the sequences of the reads. The reads can then be assembled into contigs. To determine the phylogenetic identity of a sequence, it is compared to available full genome sequences using methods such as BLAST. One drawback of this approach is that many members of microbial communities do not have a representative sequenced genome, but this applies to 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing as well and is a fundamental problem. With shotgun sequencing, it can be resolved by having a high coverage (50-100x) of the unknown genome, effectively doing a de novo genome assembly. As soon as there is a complete genome of an unknown organism available it can be compared phylogenetically and the organism put into its place in the tree of life, by creating new taxa. An emerging approach is to combine shotgun sequencing with proximity-ligation data (Hi-C) to assemble complete microbial genomes without culturing.

Despite the fact that metagenomics is limited by the availability of reference sequences, one significant advantage of metagenomics over targeted amplicon sequencing is that metagenomics data can elucidate the functional potential of the community DNA. Targeted gene surveys cannot do this as they only reveal the phylogenetic relationship between the same gene from different organisms. Functional analysis is done by comparing the recovered sequences to databases of metagenomic annotations such as KEGG. The metabolic pathways that these genes are involved in can then be predicted with tools such as MG-RAST, CAMERA and IMG/M.

Metatranscriptomics studies have been performed to study the gene expression of microbial communities through methods such as the pyrosequencing of extracted RNA. Structure based studies have also identified non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) such as ribozymes from microbiota. Metaproteomics is an approach that studies the proteins expressed by microbiota, giving insight into its functional potential.

The Human Microbiome Project launched in 2008 was a United States National Institutes of Health initiative to identify and characterize microorganisms found in both healthy and diseased humans. The five-year project, best characterized as a feasibility study with a budget of $115 million, tested how changes in the human microbiome are associated with human health or disease.

The Earth Microbiome Project (EMP) is an initiative to collect natural samples and analyze the microbial community around the globe. Microbes are highly abundant, diverse and have an important role in the ecological system. Yet , it was estimated that the total global environmental DNA sequencing effort had produced less than 1 percent of the total DNA found in a liter of seawater or a gram of soil, and the specific interactions between microbes are largely unknown. The EMP aims to process as many as 200,000 samples in different biomes, generating a complete database of microbes on earth to characterize environments and ecosystems by microbial composition and interaction. Using these data, new ecological and evolutionary theories can be proposed and tested.

Microbial DNA inhabiting a person's human body can uniquely identify the person. A person's privacy may be compromised if the person anonymously donated microbe DNA data. Their medical condition and identity could be revealed.


</doc>
<doc id="54306415" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=54306415" title="Phasevarion">
Phasevarion

In bacteria, phasevarions (also known as phase variable regulons) mediate a coordinated change in the expression of multiple genes or proteins. This occurs via phase variation of a single DNA methyltransferase. Phase variation of methyltransferase expression results in differential methylation throughout the bacterial genome, leading to variable expression of multiple genes through epigenetic mechanisms.

Phasevarions have been identified in several mucosal-associated human-adapted pathogens, which include; "Haemophilus influenzae", "Neisseria meningitidis", "Neisseria gonorrhoeae", "Helicobacter pylori", "Moraxella catarrhalis", and "Streptococcus pneumoniae". All described phasevarions regulate expression of proteins that are involved in host colonization, survival, and pathogenesis, and many regulate putative vaccine targets. The presence of phasevarions complicates identification of stably expressed proteins, as the regulated genes do not contain any identifiable features. The only way to identify genes in a phasevarion is by detailed study of the organisms containing such systems. Study of the phasevarions, and identification of proteins they regulate, is therefore critical to generate effective and stable vaccines.

Many of the phasevarions described to date are controlled by Type III methyltransferases. Mod genes are the methyltransferase component of type III restriction modification (R-M) systems in bacteria, and serve to protect host DNA from the action of the associated restriction enzyme. However, in many bacterial pathogens, mod genes contain simple sequence repeats (SSRs), and the associated restriction enzyme encoding gene (res) is inactive. In these organisms the DNA methyltransferase phase varies between two states (ON or OFF) by variation in the number of SSRs in the "mod" gene. Multiple different "mod" genes have been identified. Each Mod methylates a different DNA sequence in the genome. Methylation of unique DNA sequences results in different Mod enzymes that regulate the expression of different sets of genes; i.e., they control different phasevarions. For example, twenty-one unique "modA" alleles have been identified in "Haemophilus influenzae"; "Neisseria" species contain seven "modB" alleles; and "Helicobacter pylori" contains seventeen "modH" alleles. Individual strains of "Neisseria gonorrhoeae" and "Neisseria meningitidis" can contain multiple, independently switching "mod" genes; for example, "N. gonorrhoae" can contain both "modA" and "modB" genes002C and individual "N. meningitidis" strains that contain "modA", "modB" and "modD" have been identified.

A phasevarion controlled by a methyltransferase associated with a Type I R-M system has been identified and studied in "Streptococcus pneumoniae". This phase-variable methyltransferase switches between six different methyltransferase specificities by shuffling between multiple, variable copies of the specificity subunit, "hsdS", that dictates the sequence to be methylated. By shuffling DNA sequences, six different HsdS specificity proteins are produced in a pneumococcal population. This means six different DNA sequences are methylated by the functional methyltransferase. This genetic shuffling, or recombination, occurs between inverted repeat sequences located in the multiple, variable "hsd" genes present in the locus. Recombination is catalyzed by a recombinase that is associated with the type I locus. These six methyltransferase specificities (SpnD39IIIA-F) result in six differentiated cell types in a pneumococcal population.

A potential phasevarion controlled by a Type IIG R-M system has been recently described in the human gastric pathogen "Campylobacter jejuni".

Switching of "mod" genes is selected for under certain disease states or within specific host niches: for example, the non-typeable "Haemophilus influenzae" (NTHi) "modA2" ON state is selected for within the middle ear during manifestation of experimental otitis media. A switch from "modA2" OFF to "modA2" ON results in more severe middle ear disease in a model of otitis media than in a situation where switching from "modA2" OFF to "modA2" ON does not occur. Phase-variation of the "modA2" allele also results in NTHi populations with distinct advantages under oxidative stress and increased resistance to neutrophil killing. In "M. catarrhalis", the "modM3" allele is associated with strains isolated from the middle ear of children. In "S. pneumoniae", selection of particular SpnD39III alleles (allele A) occurs when "S. pneumoniae" is present in blood, which implies that SpnD39III-A regulates genes that give a selective advantage in this "in vivo" niche. No selection for any SpnD39III allele was seen when S. pneumoniae was present in the nasopharynx.


</doc>
<doc id="53593604" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=53593604" title="Aliidiomarina">
Aliidiomarina

Aliidiomarina is a genus of halophilic bacteria.


</doc>
<doc id="3481221" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3481221" title="Denitrifying bacteria">
Denitrifying bacteria

Denitrifying bacteria are a diverse group of bacteria that encompass many different phyla. This group of bacteria, together with denitrifying fungi and archaea, is capable of performing denitrification as part of the nitrogen cycle. They metabolise nitrogenous compounds using various enzymes, turning nitrogen oxides back to nitrogen gas (<chem>N2</chem>) or nitrous oxide (<chem>N2O</chem>).

There is a great diversity in biological traits. Denitrifying bacteria have been identified in over 50 genera with over 125 different species and are estimated to represent 10-15% of bacteria population in water, soil and sediment.
Denitrifying include for example several species of "Pseudomonas", "Alkaligenes" , "Bacillus" and others. 
The majority of denitrifying bacteria are facultative aerobic heterotrophs that switch from aerobic respiration to denitrification when oxygen as an available terminal electron acceptor (TEA) runs out. This forces the organism to use nitrate to be used as a TEA. Because the diversity of denitrifying bacteria is so large, this group can thrive in a wide range of habitats including some extreme environments such as environments that are highly saline and high in temperature. Aerobic denitrifiers can conduct an aerobic respiratory process in which nitrate is converted gradually to N (NO →NO → NO → NO → N ), using nitrate reductase (Nar or Nao), nitrite reductase (Nir), nitric oxide reductase (Nor), and nitrous oxide reductase (Nos). Phylogenetic analysis revealed that aerobic denitrifiers mainly belong to α-, β- and γ-"Proteobacteria". 

Denitrifying bacteria use denitrification to generate ATP.

The most common denitrification process is outlined below, with the nitrogen oxides being converted back to gaseous nitrogen:

2 NO + 10 e + 12 H → N + 6 HO

The result is one molecule of nitrogen and six molecules of water. Denitrifying bacteria are a part of the N cycle, and consists of sending the N back into the atmosphere. 
The reaction above is the overall half reaction of the process of denitrification. The reaction can be further divided into different half reactions each requiring a specific enzyme. The transformation from nitrate to nitrite is performed by nitrate reductase (Nar)

NO + 2 H + 2 e → NO + HO

Nitrite reductase (Nir) then converts nitrite into nitric oxide

2 NO + 4 H + 2 e → 2 NO + 2 HO
Nitric oxide reductase (Nor) then converts nitric oxide into nitrous oxide

2 NO + 2 H + 2 e → NO + HO

Nitrous oxide reductase (Nos) terminates the reaction by converting nitrous oxide into dinitrogen
NO + 2 H + 2 e → N + HO

It is important to note that any of the products produced at any step can be exchanged with the soil environment.

The process of denitrification can lower the fertility of soil as nitrogen, a growth-limiting factor, is removed from the soil and lost to the atmosphere. This loss of nitrogen to the atmosphere can eventually be regained via introduced nutrients, as part of the nitrogen cycle. Some nitrogen may also be fixated by species of nitrifying bacteria and the cyanobacteria. Another important environmental issue concerning denitrification is the fact that the process tends to produce large amounts of by-products. Examples of by-products are nitric oxide (NO) and nitrous oxide (NO). NO is an ozone depleting species and NO is a potent greenhouse gas which can contribute to global warming.



</doc>
<doc id="55815630" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55815630" title="Twitching motility">
Twitching motility

Twitching motility is a form of crawling bacterial motility used to move over surfaces. Twitching is mediated by the activity of hair-like filaments called type IV pili which extend from the cell's exterior, bind to surrounding solid substrates and retract, pulling the cell forwards in a manner similar to the action of a grappling hook. The name "twitching motility" is derived from the characteristic jerky and irregular motions of individual cells when viewed under the microscope. It has been observed in many bacterial species, but is most well studied in "Pseudomonas aeruginosa", "Neisseria gonorrhoeae" and "Myxococcus xanthus". Active movement mediated by the twitching system has been shown to be an important component of the pathogenic mechanisms of several species.

The type IV pilus complex consists of both the pilus itself and the machinery required for its construction and motor activity. The pilus filament is largely composed of the PilA protein, with more uncommon minor pilins at the tip. These are thought to play a role in initiation of pilus construction. Under normal conditions, the pilin subunits are arranged as a helix with five subunits in each turn, but pili under tension are able to stretch and rearrange their subunits into a second configuration with around subunits per turn.

Three subcomplexes form the apparatus responsible for assembling and retracting the type IV pili. The core of this machinery is the motor subcomplex, consisting of the PilC protein and the cytosolic ATPases PilB and PilT. These ATPases drive pilus extension or retraction respectively, depending on which of the two is currently bound to the pilus complex. Surrounding the motor complex is the alignment subcomplex, formed from the PilM, PilN, PilO and PilP proteins. These proteins form a bridge between the inner and outer membranes and create a link between the inner membrane motor subcomplex and the outer membrane secretion subcomplex. This consists of a pore formed from the PilQ protein, through which the assembled pilus can exit the cell.

Regulatory proteins associated with the twitching motility system have strong sequence and structural similarity to those that regulate bacterial chemotaxis using flagellae. In "P. aeruginosa" for example, a total of four homologous chemosensory pathways are present, three regulating swimming motility and one regulating twitching motility. These chemotactic systems allow cells to regulate twitching so as to move towards chemoattractants such as phospholipids and fatty acids. In contrast to the run-and-tumble model of chemotaxis associated with flagellated cells however, movement towards chemoattractants in twitching cells appears to be mediated via regulation of the timing of directional reversals.

Twitching motility is capable of driving the movement of individual cells. The pattern of motility that results is highly dependent upon cell shape and the distribution of pili over the cell surface. In "N. gonorrhoeae" for example, the roughly spherical cell shape and uniform distribution of pili results in cells adopting a 2D random walk over the surface they are attached to. In contrast, species such as "P. aeruginosa" and "M. xanthus" exist as elongated rods with pili localised at their poles, and show much greater directional persistence during crawling due to the resulting bias in force generation direction. "P. aeruginosa" and "M. xanthus" are also able to reverse direction during crawling by switching the pole of pilus localization. Type IV pili also mediate a form of walking motility in "P. aeruginosa", where pili are used to pull the cell rod into a vertical orientation and move it at much higher speeds than during horizontal crawling motility.

The existence of many pili pulling simultaneously on the cell body results in a balance of forces determining the movement of the cell body. This is known as the tug-of-war model of twitching motility. Sudden changes in the balance of forces caused by detachment or release of individual pili results in a fast jerk (or 'slingshot') that combines fast rotational and lateral movements, in contrast to the slower lateral movements seen during the longer periods between slingshots.

Both presence of type IV pili and active pilar movement appear to be important contributors to the pathogenicity of several species. In "P. aeruginosa", loss of pilus retraction results in a reduction of bacterial virulence in pneumonia and reduces colonisation of the cornea. Some bacteria are also able to twitch along vessel walls against the direction of fluid flow within them, which is thought to permit colonisation of otherwise inaccessible sites in the vasculatures of plants and animals.

Bacterial cells can also be targeted by twitching: during the cell invasion phase of the lifecycle of "Bdellovibrio", type IV pili are used by cells to pull themselves through gaps formed in the cell wall of prey bacteria. Once inside, the "Bdellovibrio" are able to use the host cell's resources to grow and reproduce, eventually lysing the cell wall of the prey bacterium and escaping to invade other cells.

Twitching motility is also important during the formation of biofilms. During biofilm establishment and growth, motile bacteria are able to interact with secreted extracellular polymeric substances (EPSs) such as Psl, alginate and extracellular DNA. As they encounter sites of high EPS deposition, "P. aeruginosa" cells slow down, accumulate and deposit further EPS components. This positive feedback is an important initiating factor for the establishment of microcolonies, the precursors to fully fledged biofilms. In addition, once biofilms have become established, their twitching-mediated spread is facilitated and organised by components of the EPS.

Twitching can also influence the structure of biofilms. During their establishment, twitching-capable cells are able to crawl on top of cells lacking twitching motility and dominate the fast-growing external surface of the biofilm.

Type IV pili and related structures can be found across almost all phyla of Bacteria and Archaea, however definitive twitching motility has been shown in a more limited range of prokaryotes. Most well studied and wide spread are the twitching proteobacteria, such as "Neisseria gonorrhoeae", "Myxococcus xanthus" and "Pseudomonas aeruginosa". Nevertheless, twitching has been observed in other phyla as well. For example, twitching motility has been observed in the cyanobacterium "Synechocystis", as well as the gram-positive firmicutes "Streptococcus sanguinis".

Other structures and systems closely related to type IV pili have also been observed in prokaryotes. In Archea, for example, bundles of type IV-like filaments have been observed to form helical structures similar in both form and function to the bacterial flagellum. These swimming associated structures have been termed archaella. Also closely related to the type IV pilus is the type II secretion system, itself widely distributed amongst gram-negative bacteria. In this secretion system, cargo destined for export is associated with tips of type IV-like pseudopili in the periplasm. Extension of the pseudopili through secretin proteins similar to PilQ permits these cargo proteins to cross the outer membrane and enter the extracellular environment.

Because of this wide but patchy distribution of type IV pilus-like machinery, it has been suggested that the genetic material encoding it has been transferred between species via horizontal gene transfer following its initial development in a single species of proteobacteria.



</doc>
<doc id="56007472" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56007472" title="Annwoodia">
Annwoodia

The genus Annwoodia was named in 2017 to circumscribe an organism previously described as a member of the genus "Thiobacillus", "Thiobacillus aquaesulis" - the type and only species is "Annwoodia aquaesulis", which was isolated from the geothermal waters of the Roman Baths in the city of Bath in the United Kingdom by Ann P. Wood and Donovan P. Kelly of the University of Warwick - the genus was subsequently named to honour Wood's contribution to microbiology. The genus falls within the family "Thiobacillaceae" along with "Thiobacillus" and "Sulfuritortus", both of which comprise autotrophic organisms dependent on thiosulfate, other sulfur oxyanions and sulfide as electron donors for chemolithoheterotrophic growth. Whilst "Annwoodia" spp. and "Sulfuritortus" spp. are thermophilic, "Thiobacillus" spp. are mesophilic.

"A. aquaesulis" is moderately thermophilic with an optimum temperature of 43 °C and a temperature range of 30 °C to 55 °C - a similar temperature profile to the related genus "Sulfuritortus" - and is a facultative chemolithoautotroph that grows on reduced sulfur oxyanions such as thiosulfate as the electron donor and carbon dioxide or bicarbonate as the carbon source. Unlike "Thiobacillus" spp., "Annwoodia" spp. do not produce tetrathionate during growth on thiosulfate and can also grow heterotrophically on nutrient broth. Elementary sulfur is deposited by the organism in batch culture with thiosulfate as the electron donor, but not in chemostat culture. "A. aquaesulis" can use nitrate as a terminal electron acceptor, as well as molecular oxygen. The dominant respiratory quinone is ubiquinone-8 and the G+C fraction of the type strain of the type species is 67.5 mol%. All members of the genus produce volutin (polyphosphate) granules but not capsules or endospores. "A. aquaesulis" has a pH optimum of 7.5-8.0 and pH range of 7.0 to 9.0. Whilst nutrient broth and yeast extract will support heterotrophic growth, simple carbon compounds and ions such as sugars, organic acids, formate and monomethylamine do not support growth. Ammonium is the only source of nitrogen.

"Annwoodia aquaesulis" strains have been detected in mixed-population packed-bed reactors containing limestone as a source of carbon, elementary sulfur as the electron donor and nitrate as the terminal electron acceptor, as well as in karstic sulfidic thermal groundwater ecosystems of broad similarity to those from which the type strain was isolated 

"Annwoodia aquaesulis" grown on thiosulfate, tetrathionate or trithionate has high growth yields, which are broadly similar to those of "Thermithiobacillus" spp., and are higher than members of the closely related genus "Thiobacillus", indicating core metabolic differences. This high yield was observed in spite of 70% more carbon dioxide being fixed than could be accounted for as biomass, indicating the excretion of a carbon intermediate, which is not observed in "Thermithiobacillus tepidarius", which was isolated from the same location at the Roman Baths in Bath, also by enrichment culture on thiosulfate as the sole electron donor and molecular oxygen as the terminal electron acceptor.


</doc>
<doc id="894015" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=894015" title="Ureaplasma urealyticum">
Ureaplasma urealyticum

Ureaplasma urealyticum is a bacterium belonging to the genus "Ureaplasma" and the family Mycoplasmataceae in the order Mycoplasmatales. This family consists of the genera "Mycoplasma" and "Ureaplasma". Its type strain is T960.

The six recognised "Ureaplasma" species have a GC content of 27 to 30 percent and a genome size ranging from 0.76 to 1.17 million base pairs, and cholesterol is required for growth. A defining characteristic of the genus is that they perform urea hydrolysis. Some strains originally classified as "U. urealyticum" should be treated as a new species, "U. parvum".

"U. urealyticum" can cause urethritis and bacterial vaginosis. It has also has been linked to infertility. Infection can occur in extragenital sites.
In addition, this pathogen may latently infect the chorionic villi tissues of pregnant women, thereby impacting pregnancy outcome.




</doc>
<doc id="55807342" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=55807342" title="Mycorrhiza helper bacteria">
Mycorrhiza helper bacteria

Mycorrhiza helper bacteria (MHB) are a group of organisms that form symbiotic associations with both ectomycorrhiza and arbuscular mycorrhiza. MHBs are diverse and belong to different bacterial phyla including both gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria. Some of the most common types are "Pseudomonas" and "Streptomyces". MHBs have specific interactions with fungi, but not with the plants. MHB enhance mycorrhizal function, increase mycorrhizal growth, provide nutrients to the fungus and plant, improve soil conductance, select to aid pathogens, and help promote defense mechanisms.

MHBs consist of a diverse group of organisms, often gram-negative and gram-positive bacteria. Most of the bacteria are associated with both ectomycorrhiza and arbuscular mycorrhiza, but some show specificity to a particular type of fungus. The common phyla that MHB belong to will be addressed in the following sections, as well as common genera.

The Proteobacteria are a large and diverse group of gram-negative bacteria containing five classes. "Pseudomonas" is in the gammaproteobacteria class. Specific bacteria within this genus are strongly associated as being MHBs in the rhizosphere of both ectomycorrhiza and arbuscular mycorrhiza. "Pseudomonas fluorescens" has been examined in several studies to understand how they work in benefiting the mycorrhiza and plant. In one study, they found that the bacteria helped ectomycorrhizal fungi promote a symbiotic relationship with the plant by examining an increase in formation of mycorrhiza. Some bacteria improve root colonization and plant growth when associated with arbuscular mycorrhiza. The improvement of growth has been hypothesized that MHB aid the plant to defend against pathogens by improving the nutrient uptake. However, the mechanism these species use to help both of the fungi is still unknown and needs to be further investigated.

Actinobacteria are gram-positive bacteria, and they are found in the soil. In this phylum, "Streptomyces" is the largest genus of bacteria, and are often associated with MHBs. "Streptomyces" are of the Actinobacteria class. "Streptomyces" have been an organism of study in biological research on MHB. One study, they reported that "Streptomyces" have increased root colonization, growth, mycorrhizal colonization, and fungal growth. However, there is not just a single mechanism that the MHB participates in. It has also been found that "Streptomyces" interact with ectomycorrhiza and arbuscular mycorrhiza.

Firmicutes are gram-positive bacteria, many of which have a low GC content. There are a few genera that act as MHB, but one that is the most common is "Bacillius". "Bacillius" belong to the class Bacilli, and is a rod-shaped organism that can be free-living or pathogenic. However, in the presence of mycorrhiza some species can be beneficial and are considered to be MHBs. Since they are common, they can form a relationship with ectomycorrhiza and arbuscular mycorrhiza, similar to the previous genera. "Bacillius" aids the establishment and growth of mycorrhiza, and helps with the fixation of nitrogen in the rhizosphere.

MHB are known to have several functions when interacting with the roots and growth of fungi. In several studies it has been reported that MHB can help fungi by increasing growth and aid with nutrient intake.

Some MHB are known to help break down molecules to a more usable form. MHBs can obtain inorganic and organic nutrients in the soil through a direct process known as mineral-weathering which aids in the recycling nutrients from the environment. The process of mineral-weathering releases protons and iron into the soil. This results in the lowering of the pH. A diverse group of bacteria can participate in the mineral- weathering process, such as "Pseudomonas", "Burkholderia", and "Collimonas". The acidification of the soil by MHBs is hypothesized to be linked to their glucose metabolism.

MHBs also help gather unavailable phosphorus from soil. Phosphate solubilizing rhizobacteria are the most common MHB that aid in phosphorus uptake. The bacteria are involved in this process by releasing phosphate-degrading compounds in the soil to break down organic and inorganic phosphate. As a result, the MHB create a pool of phosphate that the mycorrhiza could use. The bacteria work in phosphorus-limited conditions to help the mycorrhiza establish and grow. "Streptomyces" can assist arbuscular mycorrhiza in phosphorus-limited conditions through a similar process.

MHBs in the rhizosphere often have the capability to acquire nitrogen that the plant can use. The MHBs are able to fix nitrogen in the soil, and create pools of available nitrogen. However, MHB do not cause plant modifications as legumes do, to help with nitrogen-fixation. Nitrogen-fixation is done only in the surrounding soil in relation to the mycorrhiza. In one study, researchers reported that a "Bacillius" MHB contributed to the nitrogen-fixation, and among other factors helped the plant grow when inoculated with a fungus.

It has been proposed by Kaska, Myllylä, and Cooper that MHB induce growth hormones in a plant, which helps the mycorrhiza interact with the lateral roots in soil. An increase of root formation was also observed when "Pseudomonas putida" produced growth hormones, and was inoculated with the arbuscular mycorrhiza, "Gigaspora rosea," on a cucumber plant. The inoculation of both the MHB and the fungus allowed for an increase in root elongation and growth in the soil, similar to the previous study. In another study, it was found that MHB can release gaseous compounds to attract and aid the growth of fungi. The introduction of growth hormones and gaseous compounds produced by MHB was only discovered recently, and requires further study on how MHB influence the mycorrhiza symbiotic relationship and root growth.

Researchers have reported that the fungal genes can be altered in the presence of an MHB. In one study, it was hypothesized that in the presence of a fungus an MHB will promote an increase in the gene expression of a gene that helps to promote growth in the fungus. The fungus changes its genes expression after the MHB has promoted growth of the fungus, thus the alteration of the gene is an indirect effect.

Only certain bacteria are specific to mycorrhizal fungi groups. Results have shown that only the indigenous arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi of the clover plant could grow in the presence "Pseudomonas putida," but in fact, the plant could grow with the presence of multiple bacteria. It has been hypothesized that rhizosphere helper bacteria, in the soil, have developed traits to aid them in competition for inoculating fungi in their environment. Thus, it is plausible that MHBs select for certain fungi and developed some specificity towards a fungus that favours the bacteria.

MHB help mycorrhiza establish symbiotic associations in stressful environments such as those high in toxic metals. In harsh environments, the bacteria assist in acquiring more nutrients such as nitrogen and phosphorus. MHB helps to prevent the uptake of toxic metals including lead, zinc, and cadmium. The bacteria decrease the amount of metals taken up by the plant through blockade mechanisms. The blockade of the toxic metals by the bacteria allows the fungus to form a stronger symbiotic association with the plant, and promotes the growth of both. Another proposed mechanism of MHB in toxic environments is that the bacteria aid the mycorrhiza by compensating for the negative effects the toxic metal imposed. The MHB helps by increasing the plant nutrition uptake, and creating a balance between the macronutrients and micronutrients. Thus, MHB have mechanisms to help the plant tolerate harsh and otherwise unsuitable environments.

In the presence of a pathogenic fungus, most studies show that MHB aid in fighting off pathogens. However, there have been a few cases where MHB help to promote pathogenic effects of a fungus.

There have been a few studies that have found that MHB aid pathogenic fungi. One study showed that MHB aided in colonization of a type of fungal pathogen because the surrounding environment was unsuitable for the symbiotic mycorrhiza. Thus the MHB became more harmful under certain conditions to increase their own fitness.  Researchers have also found that MHB help the pathogenic fungus to colonize on the surface of the plant. This has a negative effect on the plant, but increasing the deleterious effects of the fungus. Another proposed mechanism is that MHB alters the defense mechanism of the plant, by shutting off degrading peroxidase enzymes, and allowing the pathogenic fungus to inoculate the plant.
In several studies, researchers have proposed numerous ways MHB defends pathogens. In one experiment researchers observed that MHB produced acid in the surrounding environment, which helped to defeat off the pathogen. It has also been hypothesized that the defense mechanism against pathogens is from a combination of both fungus and plant. Another study found that MHB release antifungal metabolites into the soil. The anti-fungal metabolites produce antagonistic effects towards the pathogenic fungi. However, MHB can choose whether to help defend a pathogen depending on the nutrient availability and space in the rhizosphere. Further research is still necessary to understand the mechanism of how MHBs aid mycorrhiza defeat pathogens.


</doc>
<doc id="56249865" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56249865" title="Dehalogenimonas formicexedens">
Dehalogenimonas formicexedens

Dehalogenimonas formicexedens is a Gram-negative, strictly anaerobic and non-spore-forming bacterium from the genus of "Dehalogenimonas" which has been isolated from contaminated groundwater in Louisiana in the United States.



</doc>
<doc id="56255499" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56255499" title="Dehalogenimonas alkenigignens">
Dehalogenimonas alkenigignens

Dehalogenimonas alkenigignens is a strictly anaerobic bacterium from the genus of "Dehalogenimonas" which has been isolated from groundwater from Louisiana in the United States.



</doc>
<doc id="56775486" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56775486" title="Cable bacteria">
Cable bacteria

Cable bacteria are filamentous bacteria that conduct electricity across distances over 1 cm in sediment and groundwater aquifers. Cable bacteria couple the reduction of oxygen or nitrate at the sediment's surface to the oxidation of sulfide in the deeper, anoxic, sediment layers.

Long-distance electrical conductance in sediment was first observed in 2010 as a spatial separation of sulfide oxidation and oxygen reduction in marine sediment that was interrupted and re-established at a rate faster than could be explained by chemical diffusion. It was later found that this electrical conductance could be observed across a non-conductive layer of glass microspheres, where the only possible conductive structures were filamentous bacteria belonging to the family Desulfobulbaceae. The conductivity of single, live filaments was later demonstrated by observing the oxidation state of cytochromes using Raman microscopy. The same phenomenon was later observed in freshwater sediments and groundwater aquifers. Within a 15 cm thick top layer of sediment, cable bacteria densities providing total length of up to 2 km per square centimeter of surface have been observed.

Cable bacteria filaments are 0.4—1.7 µm in diameter and up to 15 mm long. Filaments consist of rod-shaped cells with an average length of 3 µm and 15-58 ridges around encircling the cells diameter. These ridges are hypothesized to contain the cells' conductive structures. Each ridge contains two parallel "strings" - continuous structures that connect cells in the filament to one another. The diameter of junctions between cells in the filament varies from being smaller than the cell diameter, the same diameter as the cells on either side of the junction, or bulging out to become wider than the cell diameter. 

Two candidate genera of cable bacteria have been described: "Electrothrix" containing four candidate species, found in marine or brackish sediments, and "Electronema" containing two candidate species, found in freshwater sediments. These genera are classified within the family Desulfobulbaceae. Cable bacteria are defined by their function rather than their phylogeny, and it is possible that further cable bacteria taxa will be discovered.

Cable bacteria strongly influence the geochemical properties of the surrounding environment. Their activity promotes the oxidation of iron at the surface of the sediment, and the resulting iron oxides bind phosphorus-containing compounds and hydrogen sulfide, limiting the amount of phosphorus and hydrogen sulfide in the water. Phosphorus can cause eutrophication, and hydrogen sulfide can be toxic to marine life, meaning that cable bacteria play an important role in maintaining marine ecosystems in coastal areas.

Cable bacteria have been found associated with benthic microbial fuel cells, devices that convert chemical energy on the ocean floor to electrical energy. In the future, cable bacteria may play a role in increasing the efficiency of microbial fuel cells. Cable bacteria have also been found associated with a bioelectrochemical system for degrading contaminating hydrocarbons in marine sediment and thus may play a role in future oil spill cleanup technologies.

Cable bacteria have been identified in a diverse range of climatic conditions worldwide, including Denmark, the Netherlands, Japan, Australia, and the United States.



</doc>
<doc id="56778715" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56778715" title="Mangrovibacter">
Mangrovibacter

Mangrovibacter is a genus in the phylum Proteobacteria (Bacteria). The name "Mangrovibacter" derives from:New Latin noun "mangrovum", mangrove; New Latin masculine gender noun, a rod"bacter", nominally meaning "a rod", but in effect meaning a bacterium, rod; New Latin masculine gender noun "Mangrovibacter", mangrove rod.

The genus contains a single species, namely "M. plantisponsor" ( Rameshkumar "et al". 2010, (Type species of the genus).; Latin feminine gender noun "planta", plant; Latin masculine gender noun "sponsor", sponsor, guarantor; New Latin masculine gender noun "plantisponsor", sponsor of plants, referring to the potentially plant-beneficial properties of the type strain.)



</doc>
<doc id="56778780" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56778780" title="Mameliella">
Mameliella

Mameliella is a genus in the phylum Proteobacteria (Bacteria). The name "Mameliella" derives from: New Latin feminine gender dim. noun "Mameliella", arbitrary name derived from the acronym MMEL, marine microbial ecology laboratory.

The genus contains a single species, namely "M. alba" ( Zheng "et al". 2010, (Type species of the genus).; Latin feminine gender adjective "alba", white.)



</doc>
<doc id="56778822" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=56778822" title="Maribaculum">
Maribaculum

Maribaculum is a genus in the phylum Proteobacteria (Bacteria). The name "Maribaculum" derives from: Latin noun "mare", the sea; Latin neuter gender noun "baculum", a stick or rod; New Latin neuter gender noun "Maribaculum", rod from the sea.

The genus contains a single species, namely "M. marinum" ( Lai "et al". 2009, (Type species of the genus).; Latin neuter gender adjective "marinum", of or belonging to the sea, marine.)



</doc>
<doc id="57152166" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57152166" title="Mucispirillum">
Mucispirillum

Mucispirillum is a genus in the phylum Deferribacteres (Bacteria). It is represented by the single species "Mucispirillum schaedleri|." It has been found in the intestinal tract of some rodents and considered a commensal with some association to disease. This species has been found in cockroaches mice, turkeys, dogs, pigs, goats, termites, and sometimes humans. It is anaerobic and does not form spores. It is motile, flagellated and thought to have the ability to move through mucus.

The name "Mucispirillum" derives from Latin noun "mucus", mucus; New Latin dim. neuter gender noun "spirillum", a small spiral; New Latin neuter gender noun "mucispirillum", a small spiral rod of the mucus.

This genus contains a single species, namely "M. schaedleri" (Robertson "et al". 2005, (Type species of the genus).; New Latin genitive case noun "schaedleri", of Schaedler, in honour of Russell Schaedler, active in the study of the bacteria of the intestinal tract of mammals.



</doc>
<doc id="57152561" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57152561" title="Marinactinospora">
Marinactinospora

Marinactinospora is a genus in the phylum Actinobacteria (Bacteria).

The name "Marinactinospora" derives from the Latin adjective "marinus", of or belonging to the sea; Greek noun "aktis, aktinos (ἀκτίς, ἀκτῖνος)", a beam; Greek noun "spora (σπορά)", a seed, and in biology a spore; New Latin feminine gender noun "Marinactinospora", marine and spored ray, referring to marine spore-forming actinomycete.

The genus contains a single species, namely "M. thermotolerans" ( Tian "et al". 2009, (Type species of the genus).; Greek noun "thermē (θέρμη)", heat; Latin participle adjective "tolerans", tolerating; New Latin participle adjective "thermotolerans", able to tolerate a high temperature.)



</doc>
<doc id="57546599" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57546599" title="Bacterial evolution">
Bacterial evolution

Bacterial evolution may refer to the biological evolution of bacteria as studied in:


</doc>
<doc id="57581324" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57581324" title="Rubrivivax benzoatilyticus">
Rubrivivax benzoatilyticus

Rubrivivax benzoatilyticus is a bacteria that can make use of light or aromatic compounds for growth. It is brown coloured.

The aromatic compounds that can be consumed as food for this bacteria are benzoic acid, 2-aminobenzoic acid (anthranilate), 4-aminobenzoic acid, 4-hydroxybenzoic acid, phthalate, phenylalanine, trans-cinnamate, benzamide, salicylate, cyclohexanone, cyclohexanol and cyclohexane-2-carboxylate.



</doc>
<doc id="57831628" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=57831628" title="Komagataeibacter xylinus">
Komagataeibacter xylinus

Komagataeibacter xylinus is a species of bacteria best known for its ability to produce cellulose.

The species was first described in 1886 by Adrian John Brown, who identified the bacteria while studying fermentation. Brown gave the species the name "Bacterium xylinum". It has since been known by several other names, mainly "Acetobacter xylinum" and "Gluconacetobacter xylinus". It was given its current name, with the establishment of the new genus "Komagataeibacter", in 2012. It is the type species of the genus.

"K. xylinus" is a member of the acetic acid bacteria, a group of Gram-negative aerobic bacteria that produce acetic acid during fermentation. "K. xylinus" is unusual among the group in also producing cellulose. Bacterial cellulose (also sometimes known as nanocellulose) is involved in the formation of biofilms. It is chemically identical to plant cellulose, but has distinct physical structure and properties.

The genome of a cellulose-deficient strain of "K. xylinus" was sequenced in 2011, and followed by the genomes of cellulose-producing strains in 2014 and 2018. The first cellulose-producing strain had a genome consisting of one chromosome 3.4 megabase pairs and five plasmids, of which one is a "megaplasmid" of about 330 kilobase pairs.

Key genes related to cellulose production occur in the four-gene operon "bcsABCD", which codes for the four subunits of the cellulose synthase enzyme. All four genes are required for efficient cellulose production "in vivo", although BcsA and BscB are sufficient "in vitro". Several other genes in the "K. xylinus" genome are also involved in cellulose production and regulation, including a cellulase enzyme.

"K. xylinus" was used for a long time as a model organism for the study of cellulose production in plants. It is also studied in its own right to explore bacterial biofilm production, cell-cell communication, and other topics of interest. Production of bacterial cellulose for industrial uses has been the subject of extensive research, but is limited by productivity and scalability.


</doc>
<doc id="26174425" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=26174425" title="Minimal infective dose">
Minimal infective dose

The concept of minimal infective dose (MID) has traditionally been used for bacteria that contaminate foods that cause infection in or from the digestive tract. MID was defined as the number of bacteria ingested (the dose) from which a pathology is observed in the consumer. Examples such as this are found in textbooks: to cause gastrointestinal disorders, the food must contain more than 100,000 "Salmonella" per gram. However, in such a formulation, we immediately see an inaccuracy: to know the dose ingested, concentration is not enough. It is also necessary to know the mass of the portion:
where:
Nevertheless, this formulation has served as a basis for very useful reasoning to establish the maximum concentrations permitted by the microbiological regulatory criteria intended to protect the health of consumers. Thus in 1992, as the outbreaks previously caused by "Listeria" "monocytogenes" involved only food containing more than 1000 "L. monocytogenes" cells per gram, lawmakers on both sides of the Atlantic - keeping a margin of safety - fixed its maximum concentration at 100 "L. monocytogenes" per gram.

The concept of a dose-response relationship developed from 1995 onward, as quantitative risk assessment matured as a discipline within the field of food safety. An infectious bacterium in a food can cause various effects: diarrhea, vomiting, sepsis, meningitis, abortion, Guillain-Barré syndrome, death, etc. As the dose increases, the severity of the pathological effects increases, and a "dose-response relationship" can often be established. For example, the higher the dose of "Salmonella", the more diarrhea occurs soon after ingestion and the more stressful it is. However, among people who have ingested the same dose, not all are affected. The proportion of people affected is called response. The dose-response relationship for a given effect (e.g., diarrhea) is therefore the relationship between the dose and the likelihood of experiencing this effect. When the response is less than about 10%, it is observed that there is a strictly proportional relationship between dose and response:
where:
Do not confuse the dose-effect relationship with the dose-response relationship.

The existence of this relation has a first important consequence: the proportionality factor, symbolized by the letter r, corresponds precisely to the probability of the effect considered when the dose is equal to one bacterial cell. As a result, the minimum infective dose is exactly equal to one bacterial cell: it is far from the traditional notion recalled at the beginning of this article. Proportionality has a second consequence, which is obvious: when the dose is divided by ten, the probability of observing the effect is also divided by ten. And it has a third consequence, which is not obvious: it is a relationship without threshold. Of course, if a portion of food does not contain the bacterium, there will be no effect. But in industrial practice, everything is done to reduce the probability that a serving contains the bacterium. There is therefore on the market food in which, for example, only one serving in a hundred is contaminated. The probability of the effect considered is then r / 100. If one in ten thousand is contaminated, the probability goes to r / 10,000, and so on. The line representing the relation can be extended to minus infinity: there is no threshold. For readers familiar with the notion of D50 (the dose that causes the effect in 50% of consumers exposed to the hazard), in most cases the following relationship applies:

To compare the dose-response relationships for different effects caused by the same bacterium, or for the same effect caused by different bacteria, we can of course directly compare the values of r. However, experience shows that it may be easier for the mind to compare the doses causing the effect in 50% or 1% of consumers. Here are some values of D1 (dose causing the effect considered in 1% of consumers exposed to the hazard):

These examples highlight two important things:


It may seem that if the contamination of food with a pathogenic bacterium is low and infrequent, the risk of becoming ill is such that there will be no public health problem. Such a view is incomplete: admittedly, consuming a low dose of this bacterium is associated with a low probability of disease. But this probability is not zero. This explains the sporadic cases observed in the population. And that is also why there is no concentration in food below which there will be no epidemic.

In the foregoing, there was mention of bacteria contaminating foods that cause infection in or from the digestive tract. Other food-borne bacteria can cause disease by producing toxins. It is no longer about infection, but toxication. Among these bacteria, some synthesize a toxin only when their concentration in the food before ingestion exceeds a threshold. This is the case of Staphylococcus aureus and Bacillus cereus, for example. The concept of MID does not apply to them, but there is indeed a concentration (not a dose) below which they do not constitute a danger to the health of the consumers.



</doc>
<doc id="44314923" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44314923" title="Spiral bacteria">
Spiral bacteria

Spiral bacteria, bacteria of spiral (helical) shape, form the third major morphological category of prokaryotes along with the rod-shaped bacilli and round cocci. Spiral bacteria can be subclassified by the number of twists per cell, cell thickness, cell flexibility, and motility. The two types of spiral cells are spirillum and spirochete, with spirillum being rigid with external flagella, and spirochetes being flexible with internal flagella.

A spirillum (plural spirilla) is a rigid spiral bacterium that is Gram-negative and frequently has external amphitrichous or lophotrichous flagella. Examples include:

A spirochete (plural spirochetes) is a very thin, elongate, flexible, spiral bacteria that is motile via internal periplasmic flagella inside the outer membrane. They comprise the phylum Spirochaetes. Owing to their morphological properties, spirochetes are difficult to Gram-stain but may be visualized using dark field microscopy or Warthin–Starry stain. Examples include:


</doc>
<doc id="4209093" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4209093" title="Bacterial cell structure">
Bacterial cell structure

The bacterium, despite its simplicity, contains a well-developed cell structure which is responsible for some of its unique biological structures and pathogenicity. Many structural features are unique to bacteria and are not found among archaea or eukaryotes. Because of the simplicity of bacteria relative to larger organisms and the ease with which they can be manipulated experimentally, the cell structure of bacteria has been well studied, revealing many biochemical principles that have been subsequently applied to other organisms.

Perhaps the most elemental structural property of bacteria is their morphology (shape). Typical examples include:
Cell shape is generally characteristic of a given bacterial species, but can vary depending on growth conditions. Some bacteria have complex life cycles involving the production of stalks and appendages (e.g. "Caulobacter") and some produce elaborate structures bearing reproductive spores (e.g. "Myxococcus", "Streptomyces"). Bacteria generally form distinctive cell morphologies when examined by light microscopy and distinct colony morphologies when grown on Petri plates.

Perhaps the most obvious structural characteristic of bacteria is (with some exceptions) their small size. For example, "Escherichia coli" cells, an "average" sized bacterium, are about 2 µm (micrometres) long and 0.5 µm in diameter, with a cell volume of 0.6–0.7 μm. This corresponds to a wet mass of about 1 picogram (pg), assuming that the cell consists mostly of water. The dry mass of a single cell can be estimated as 23% of the wet mass, amounting to 0.2 pg. About half of the dry mass of a bacterial cell consists of carbon, and also about half of it can be attributed to proteins. Therefore, a typical fully grown 1-liter culture of "Escherichia coli" (at an optical density of 1.0, corresponding to c. 10 cells/ml) yields about 1 g wet cell mass. Small size is extremely important because it allows for a large surface area-to-volume ratio which allows for rapid uptake and intracellular distribution of nutrients and excretion of wastes. At low surface area-to-volume ratios the diffusion of nutrients and waste products across the bacterial cell membrane limits the rate at which microbial metabolism can occur, making the cell less evolutionarily fit. The reason for the existence of large cells is unknown, although it is speculated that the increased cell volume is used primarily for storage of excess nutrients.

comparison of a typical bacterial cell and a typical human cell

The cell envelope is composed of the plasma membrane and cell wall. As in other organisms, the bacterial cell wall provides structural integrity to the cell. In prokaryotes, the primary function of the cell wall is to protect the cell from internal turgor pressure caused by the much higher concentrations of proteins and other molecules inside the cell compared to its external environment. The bacterial cell wall differs from that of all other organisms by the presence of peptidoglycan which is located immediately outside of the cytoplasmic membrane. Peptidoglycan is made up of a polysaccharide backbone consisting of alternating N-Acetylmuramic acid (NAM) and N-acetylglucosamine (NAG) residues in equal amounts. Peptidoglycan is responsible for the rigidity of the bacterial cell wall and for the determination of cell shape. It is relatively porous and is not considered to be a permeability barrier for small substrates. While all bacterial cell walls (with a few exceptions e.g. extracellular parasites such as "Mycoplasma") contain peptidoglycan, not all cell walls have the same overall structures. Since the cell wall is required for bacterial survival, but is absent in some eukaryotes, several antibiotics (notably the penicillins and cephalosporins) stop bacterial infections by interfering with cell wall synthesis, while having no effects on human cells which have no cell wall, only a cell membrane. There are two main types of bacterial cell walls, those of gram-positive bacteria and those of gram-negative bacteria, which are differentiated by their Gram staining characteristics. For both these types of bacteria, particles of approximately 2 nm can pass through the peptidoglycan. If the bacterial cell wall is entirely removed, it is called a protoplast while if it's partially removed, it is called a spheroplast. "β"-Lactam antibiotics such as penicillin inhibit the formation of peptidoglycan cross-links in the bacterial cell wall. The enzyme lysozyme, found in human tears, also digests the cell wall of bacteria and is the body's main defense against eye infections.

Gram-positive cell walls are thick and the peptidoglycan (also known as "murein") layer constitutes almost 95% of the cell wall in some gram-positive bacteria and as little as 5-10% of the cell wall in gram-negative bacteria. The gram-positive bacteria take up the crystal violet dye and are stained purple. The cell wall of some gram-positive bacteria can be completely dissolved by lysozymes which attacks the bonds between N-acetylmuramic acid and N-acetylglucosamine. In other gram-positive bacteria, such as "Staphylococcus aureus", the walls are resistant to the action of lysozymes. They have O-acetyl groups on carbon-6 of some muramic acid residues.
The matrix substances in the walls of gram-positive bacteria may be polysaccharides or teichoic acids. The latter are very widespread, but have been found only in gram-positive bacteria. There are two main types of teichoic acid: ribitol teichoic acids and glycerol teichoic acids. The latter one is more widespread. These acids are polymers of ribitol phosphate and glycerol phosphate, respectively, and only located on the surface of many gram-positive bacteria. However, the exact function of teichoic acid is debated and not fully understood. A major component of the gram-positive cell wall is lipoteichoic acid. One of its purposes is providing an antigenic function. The lipid element is to be found in the membrane where its adhesive properties assist in its anchoring to the membrane.

Gram-negative cell walls are much thinner than the gram-positive cell walls, and they contain a second plasma membrane superficial to their thin peptidoglycan layer, in turn adjacent to the cytoplasmic membrane. Gram-negative bacteria are stained as pink colour. The chemical structure of the outer membrane's lipopolysaccharide is often unique to specific bacterial sub-species and is responsible for many of the antigenic properties of these strains.

The plasma membrane or bacterial cytoplasmic membrane is composed of a phospholipid bilayer and thus has all of the general functions of a cell membrane such as acting as a permeability barrier for most molecules and serving as the location for the transport of molecules into the cell. In addition to these functions, prokaryotic membranes also function in energy conservation as the location about which a proton motive force is generated. Unlike eukaryotes, bacterial membranes (with some exceptions e.g. "Mycoplasma" and methanotrophs) generally do not contain sterols. However, many microbes do contain structurally related compounds called hopanoids which likely fulfill the same function. Unlike eukaryotes, bacteria can have a wide variety of fatty acids within their membranes. Along with typical saturated and unsaturated fatty acids, bacteria can contain fatty acids with additional methyl, hydroxy or even cyclic groups. The relative proportions of these fatty acids can be modulated by the bacterium to maintain the optimum fluidity of the membrane (e.g. following temperature change).

As a phospholipid bilayer, the lipid portion of the outer membrane is impermeable to charged molecules. However, channels called porins are present in the outer membrane that allow for passive transport of many ions, sugars and amino acids across the outer membrane. These molecules are therefore present in the periplasm, the region between the cytoplasmic and outer membranes. The periplasm contains the peptidoglycan layer and many proteins responsible for substrate binding or hydrolysis and reception of extracellular signals. The periplasm is thought to exist in a gel-like state rather than a liquid due to the high concentration of proteins and peptidoglycan found within it. Because of its location between the cytoplasmic and outer membranes, signals received and substrates bound are available to be transported across the cytoplasmic membrane using transport and signalling proteins imbedded there.

Fimbriae (sometimes called "attachment pili") are protein tubes that extend out from the outer membrane in many members of the "Proteobacteria". They are generally short in length and present in high numbers about the entire bacterial cell surface. Fimbriae usually function to facilitate the attachment of a bacterium to a surface (e.g. to form a biofilm) or to other cells (e.g. animal cells during pathogenesis). A few organisms (e.g. "Myxococcus") use fimbriae for motility to facilitate the assembly of multicellular structures such as fruiting bodies. Pili are similar in structure to fimbriae but are much longer and present on the bacterial cell in low numbers. Pili are involved in the process of bacterial conjugation where they are called conjugation pili or "sex pili". Type IV pili (non-sex pili) also aid bacteria in gripping surfaces.

An S-layer (surface layer) is a cell surface protein layer found in many different bacteria and in some archaea, where it serves as the cell wall. All S-layers are made up of a two-dimensional array of proteins and have a crystalline appearance, the symmetry of which differs between species. The exact function of S-layers is unknown, but it has been suggested that they act as a partial permeability barrier for large substrates. For example, an S-layer could conceivably keep extracellular proteins near the cell membrane by preventing their diffusion away from the cell. In some pathogenic species, an S-layer may help to facilitate survival within the host by conferring protection against host defence mechanisms.

Many bacteria secrete extracellular polymers outside of their cell walls called glycocalyx. These polymers are usually composed of polysaccharides and sometimes protein. Capsules are relatively impermeable structures that cannot be stained with dyes such as India ink. They are structures that help protect bacteria from phagocytosis and desiccation. Slime layer is involved in attachment of bacteria to other cells or inanimate surfaces to form biofilms. Slime layers can also be used as a food reserve for the cell.

Perhaps the most recognizable extracellular bacterial cell structures are flagella. Flagella are whip-like structures protruding from the bacterial cell wall and are responsible for bacterial motility (i.e. movement). The arrangement of flagella about the bacterial cell is unique to the species observed. Common forms include:
The bacterial flagellum consists of three basic components: a whip-like filament, a motor complex, and a hook that connects them. The filament is approximately 20 nm in diameter and consists of several protofilaments, each made up of thousands of flagellin subunits. The bundle is held together by a cap and may or may not be encapsulated. The motor complex consists of a series of rings anchoring the flagellum in the inner and outer membranes, followed by a proton-driven motor that drives rotational movement in the filament.

In comparison to eukaryotes, the intracellular features of the bacterial cell are extremely simple. Bacteria do not contain organelles in the same sense as eukaryotes. Instead, the chromosome and perhaps ribosomes are the only easily observable intracellular structures found in all bacteria. There do exist, however, specialized groups of bacteria that contain more complex intracellular structures, some of which are discussed below.

Unlike eukaryotes, the bacterial DNA is not enclosed inside of a membrane-bound nucleus but instead resides inside the bacterial cytoplasm. This means that the transfer of cellular information through the processes of translation, transcription and DNA replication all occur within the same compartment and can interact with other cytoplasmic structures, most notably ribosomes. The bacterial DNA is not packaged using histones to form chromatin as in eukaryotes but instead exists as a highly compact supercoiled structure, the precise nature of which remains unclear. Most bacterial chromosomes are circular although some examples of linear DNA exist (e.g. "Borrelia burgdorferi"). Along with chromosomal DNA, most bacteria also contain small independent pieces of DNA called plasmids that often encode for traits that are advantageous but not essential to their bacterial host. Plasmids can be easily gained or lost by a bacterium and can be transferred between bacteria as a form of horizontal gene transfer. So plasmids can be described as an extra chromosomal DNA in a bacterial cell.

In most bacteria the most numerous intracellular structure is the ribosome, the site of protein synthesis in all living organisms. All prokaryotes have 70S (where S=Svedberg units) ribosomes while eukaryotes contain larger 80S ribosomes in their cytosol. The 70S ribosome is made up of a 50S and 30S subunits. The 50S subunit contains the 23S and 5S rRNA while the 30S subunit contains the 16S rRNA. These rRNA molecules differ in size in eukaryotes and are complexed with a large number of ribosomal proteins, the number and type of which can vary slightly between organisms. While the ribosome is the most commonly observed intracellular multiprotein complex in bacteria other large complexes do occur and can sometimes be seen using microscopy.

While not typical of all bacteria some microbes contain intracellular membranes in addition to (or as extensions of) their cytoplasmic membranes. An early idea was that bacteria might contain membrane folds termed mesosomes, but these were later shown to be artifacts produced by the chemicals used to prepare the cells for electron microscopy. Examples of bacteria containing intracellular membranes are phototrophs, nitrifying bacteria and methane-oxidising bacteria. Intracellular membranes are also found in bacteria belonging to the poorly studied Planctomycetes group, although these membranes more closely resemble organellar membranes in eukaryotes and are currently of unknown function. Chromatophores are intracellular membranes found in phototrophic bacteria. Used primarily for photosynthesis, they contain bacteriochlorophyll pigments and carotenoids.

The prokaryotic cytoskeleton is the collective name for all structural filaments in prokaryotes. It was once thought that prokaryotic cells did not possess cytoskeletons, but recent advances in visualization technology and structure determination have shown that filaments indeed exist in these cells. In fact, homologues for all major cytoskeletal proteins in eukaryotes have been found in prokaryotes. Cytoskeletal elements play essential roles in cell division, protection, shape determination, and polarity determination in various prokaryotes.

Most bacteria do not live in environments that contain large amounts of nutrients at all times. To accommodate these transient levels of nutrients bacteria contain several different methods of nutrient storage in times of plenty for use in times of want. For example, many bacteria store excess carbon in the form of polyhydroxyalkanoates or glycogen. Some microbes store soluble nutrients such as nitrate in vacuoles. Sulfur is most often stored as elemental (S) granules which can be deposited either intra- or extracellularly. Sulfur granules are especially common in bacteria that use hydrogen sulfide as an electron source. Most of the above-mentioned examples can be viewed using a microscope and are surrounded by a thin nonunit membrane to separate them from the cytoplasm.

Inclusions are considered to be nonliving components of the cell that do not possess metabolic activity and are not bounded by membranes. The most common inclusions are glycogen, lipid droplets, crystals, and pigments. Volutin granules are cytoplasmic inclusions of complexed inorganic polyphosphate. These granules are called metachromatic granules due to their displaying the metachromatic effect; they appear red or blue when stained with the blue dyes methylene blue or toluidine blue.

Gas vacuoles are membrane-bound, spindle-shaped vesicles, found in some planktonic bacteria and "Cyanobacteria", that provides buoyancy to these cells by decreasing their overall cell density. Positive buoyancy is needed to keep the cells in the upper reaches of the water column, so that they can continue to perform photosynthesis. They are made up of a shell of protein that has a highly hydrophobic inner surface, making it impermeable to water (and stopping water vapour from condensing inside) but permeable to most gases. Because the gas vesicle is a hollow cylinder, it is liable to collapse when the surrounding pressure increases. Natural selection has fine tuned the structure of the gas vesicle to maximise its resistance to buckling, including an external strengthening protein, GvpC, rather like the green thread in a braided hosepipe. There is a simple relationship between the diameter of the gas vesicle and pressure at which it will collapse – the wider the gas vesicle the weaker it becomes. However, wider gas vesicles are more efficient, providing more buoyancy per unit of protein than narrow gas vesicles. Different species produce gas vesicle of different diameter, allowing them to colonise different depths of the water column (fast growing, highly competitive species with wide gas vesicles in the top most layers; slow growing, dark-adapted, species with strong narrow gas vesicles in the deeper layers). The diameter of the gas vesicle will also help determine which species survive in different bodies of water. Deep lakes that experience winter mixing expose the cells to the hydrostatic pressure generated by the full water column. This will select for species with narrower, stronger gas vesicles.

The cell achieves its height in the water column by synthesising gas vesicles. As the cell rises up, it is able to increase its carbohydrate load through increased photosynthesis. Too high and the cell will suffer photobleaching and possible death, however, the carbohydrate produced during photosynthesis increases the cell's density, causing it to sink. The daily cycle of carbohydrate build-up from photosynthesis and carbohydrate catabolism during dark hours is enough to fine-tune the cell's position in the water column, bring it up toward the surface when its carbohydrate levels are low and it needs to photosynthesis, and allowing it to sink away from the harmful UV radiation when the cell's carbohydrate levels have been replenished. An extreme excess of carbohydrate causes a significant change in the internal pressure of the cell, which causes the gas vesicles to buckle and collapse and the cell to sink out.

Bacterial microcompartments are widespread, membrane-bound organelles that are made of a protein shell that surrounds and encloses various enzymes. provide a further level of organization; they are compartments within bacteria that are surrounded by polyhedral protein shells, rather than by lipid membranes. These "polyhedral organelles" localize and compartmentalize bacterial metabolism, a function performed by the membrane-bound organelles in eukaryotes.

Carboxysomes are bacterial microcompartments found in many autotrophic bacteria such as Cyanobacteria, Knallgasbacteria, Nitroso- and Nitrobacteria. They are proteinaceous structures resembling phage heads in their morphology and contain the enzymes of carbon dioxide fixation in these organisms (especially ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase, RuBisCO, and carbonic anhydrase). It is thought that the high local concentration of the enzymes along with the fast conversion of bicarbonate to carbon dioxide by carbonic anhydrase allows faster and more efficient carbon dioxide fixation than possible inside the cytoplasm. Similar structures are known to harbor the coenzyme B12-containing glycerol dehydratase, the key enzyme of glycerol fermentation to 1,3-propanediol, in some Enterobacteriaceae (e. g. Salmonella).

Magnetosomes are bacterial microcompartments found in magnetotactic bacteria that allow them to sense and align themselves along a magnetic field (magnetotaxis). The ecological role of magnetotaxis is unknown but is thought to be involved in the determination of optimal oxygen concentrations. Magnetosomes are composed of the mineral magnetite or greigite and are surrounded by a lipid bilayer membrane. The morphology of magnetosomes is species-specific.

Perhaps the best known bacterial adaptation to stress is the formation of endospores. Endospores are bacterial survival structures that are highly resistant to many different types of chemical and environmental stresses and therefore enable the survival of bacteria in environments that would be lethal for these cells in their normal vegetative form. It has been proposed that endospore formation has allowed for the survival of some bacteria for hundreds of millions of years (e.g. in salt crystals) although these publications have been questioned. Endospore formation is limited to several genera of gram-positive bacteria such as "Bacillus" and "Clostridium". It differs from reproductive spores in that only one spore is formed per cell resulting in no net gain in cell number upon endospore germination. The location of an endospore within a cell is species-specific and can be used to determine the identity of a bacterium. Dipicolinic acid is a chemical compound which composes 5% to 15% of the dry weight of bacterial spores and is implicated in being responsible for the heat resistance of endospores. Archaeologists have found viable endospores taken from the intestines of Egyptian mummies as well as from lake sediments in Northern Sweden estimated to be many thousands of years old.




</doc>
<doc id="625081" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=625081" title="Coccus">
Coccus

A coccus (plural cocci) is any bacterium or archaeon that has a spherical, ovoid, or generally round shape. Bacteria are categorized based on their shapes into three classes: cocci (spherical-shaped), bacillus (rod-shaped) and spirochetes (spiral-shaped) cells. Coccus refers to the shape of the bacteria, and can contain multiple genera, such as staphylococci or streptococci. Cocci can grow in pairs, chains, or clusters, depending on their orientation and attachment during cell division. Contrast to many bacilli-shaped bacteria, most cocci bacteria do not have flagella and are non-motile.

Cocci is an English loanword of a modern or neo-Latin noun, which in turn stems from the Greek masculine noun "cóccos (κόκκος)" meaning "berry".

Cocci Structure

Structure for cocci may vary between gram positive and gram negative bacterial wall types.   

The cell wall structure for cocci may vary between gram positive (thick peptidoglycan layers) and gram negative (thin peptidoglycan layers). While living in their host organism, cocci can be pathogenic (e.g., streptococcus), commensal, or symbiotic.

Gram-Positive Cocci

The Gram-Positive Cocci are a large group of loosely bacteria with similar morphology. All are spherical or nearly so, but they vary considerably in size. Members of some genera are identifiable by the way cells are attached to one another: in pockets, in chains, or grapes like clusters. These arrangements reflect patterns of cell division and fact that cell stick together. "Sarcina" cells, for example, are arranged in cubical pockets because cell division alternates regularly among the three perpendicular planes. "Streptococcus" spp. resemble a string of beads because division always occurs in the same plane. Some of these strings, for example, "S. pneumoniae," are only two cells long. They are called "diplococci." Species of "Staphylococcus" have no regular plane of division. They form grape-like structures.

The various Gram-positive cocci differ physiologically and by habitat. "Micrococcus" spp. are obligate aerobes that inhabit human skin. "Staphylococcus" spp. also inhabit human skin, but they are facultative anaerobes. They ferment sugars, producing lactic acid as an end product. Many of these species produce carotenoid pigments, which color their colonies yellow or orange. "Staphylococcus aureus" is a major human pathogen. It can infect almost any tissue in the body, frequently the skin. It often causes nosocomial (hospital-acquired) infections.

Cocci may occur as single cells or remain attached following cell division. Those that remain attached can be classified based on cellular arrangement:


</doc>
<doc id="59018241" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59018241" title="Coprothermobacterales">
Coprothermobacterales

Coprothermobacterales is a new taxonomic order of thermophilic bacteria in the class Coprothermobacteria of the phylum Coprothermobacterota.

Its name derives from the type genus of this order, "Coprothermobacter", with the ending suffix '-ales', to denote an order.

The bacteria of this order have a rod-shaped morphology, do not produce spores, are nonmotile, strictly anaerobic and, being thermophiles, grow at temperature ranges above 35°C and below 70°C, for a pH between 5.0 and 9.4. Moreover, these bacteria are chemoorganotrophs and proteolytic fermenters, which produce acetic acid, H, and CO as main end-products of fermentation.


</doc>
<doc id="59020158" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59020158" title="Coprothermobacteraceae">
Coprothermobacteraceae

Coprothermobacteraceae is a new bacterial family of rod-shaped microorganisms, belonging to the order Coprothermobacterales, class Coprothermobacteria of the new phylum Coprothermobacterota.

The name of this family was given on the basis of an early genus identified within this group, dubbed ""Coprothermobacter", whose etymology derives from Greek "kopros", meaning manure, and "thermos"", warm, from the source where these bacteria were collected and the temperature conditions in which they are able to grow, which can be up to 75°C.

This taxonomic family has been introduced in 2018, after a phylogenetic reclassification of the genus "Coprothermobacter", which has been based on published studies that shown that these bacteria actually represent a deeply branched taxon of the domain Bacteria. Consequently, the clade including this genus has been classified in the phylum Coprothermobacterota, a separate phylum from Firmicute', where "Coprothermobacter" was formerly included before the reclassification. Actually, Coprothermobacteraceae is the only family belonging to the order Coprothermobacterales.


</doc>
<doc id="59027513" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59027513" title="Coprothermobacter">
Coprothermobacter

Coprothermobacter is a genus of rod-shaped microorganisms, belonging to the new bacterial family "Coprothermobacteraceae" of the new phylum "Coprothermobacterota". This taxonomic genus has been reclassified in 2018, after different phylogenetic studies showed that these bacteria represented a deeply branched taxon of the domain "Bacteria"; consequently, the clade including this genus has been classified in a separate phylum from "Firmicutes", the phylum where it was included before reclassification.

According to the first description of this genus, the etymology of its name derives from Greek words "kopros", meaning dung, from the source where one of the species ("Coprothermobacter proteolyticus") was isolated, and "thermos", meaning hot, warm, because of the relatively high temperatures at which these bacteria are able to grow, which can be as high as 75°C.

Actually, very few known bacterial species are included in this genus, which are characterized by sharing genetic information with microorganisms belonging to "Archaea", a taxonomic domain separate from the domain "Bacteria". For this reason, "Coprothermobacteria" are considered a diverging lineage of bacteria.

Among the species included in this genus, "Coprothermobacter platensis" and "Coprothermobacter proteolyticus" (formerly named "Thermobacteroides proteolyticus)" are the only strains with validly published names. 


</doc>
<doc id="59720278" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=59720278" title="Spiroplasma poulsonii">
Spiroplasma poulsonii

Spiroplasma poulsonii are bacteria of the genus "Spiroplasma" that are commonly endosymbionts of flies. These bacteria live in the hemolymph (insect blood) of the flies, where they can act as reproductive manipulators or defensive symbionts.

"Spiroplasma poulsonii" is a maternally transmitted symbiont, meaning it is primarily inherited through the female germ line. This involves the co-option of the fly yolk proteins, which allow the symbiont to enter the developing ovary. In the fly hemolymph, "S. poulsonii" feeds on lipids as its primary food source.

The "Drosophila melanogaster" "S. poulsonii" strain MSRO kills "D. melanogaster" eggs fertilized by Y-bearing sperm. This mode of reproductive manipulation benefits the symbiont as the female fly has a greater reproductive output than males. Thus, by increasing the number of daughters the fly mother produces, the symbiont increases its ability to spread through the increased reproductive output of female flies. Male-killing requires the presence of a functional dosage compensation process in its fly host. The genetic basis of this male-killing was discovered in 2018, and the gene named "SpAID" for ""Spiroplasma poulsonii" AndrocIDin," in line with previous studies that referred to the then-unknown factor as the "S. poulsonii" androcidin. "SpAID" takes advantage of host dosage compensation machinery causing DNA damage to the male X chromosome, leading to a failure of the male X chromosome to organize and model its chromatin structure.

The discovery of "SpAID" solved a mystery dating back to the 1950s of how the bacteria targeted male-specific cells. In an interview with the Global Health Institute, Dr. Toshiyuki Harumoto said: "To our knowledge, Spaid is the first bacterial effector protein identified to date that affects host cellular machinery in a sex-specific manner...”

The "S. poulsonii" strain of "Drosophila neotestacea" can defend its host from attack by nematodes and parasitic wasps. This defence is important enough that "S. poulsonii" has spread westward across North America due to the selective pressure imposed by the sterilizing nematode parasite "Howardula aoronymphium".

The mechanism through which "S. poulsonii" protects flies from nematodes and parasitic wasps relies on the presence of toxins called ribosome-inactivating proteins (RIPs), similar to sarcin or ricin. These toxins depurinate a conserved adenine site in eukaryotic 28s ribosomal RNA called the Sarcin-Ricin loop by cleaving the N-glycosidic bond between the rRNA backbone and the adenine, leaving a signature of RIP attack in nematode and wasp RNA. "Spiroplasma poulsonii" likely avoids damaging its host fly by carrying parasite-specific complements of RIP toxins encoded on bacterial plasmids. This allows genes for RIP toxins to readily move between species by horizontal gene transfer, as "D. neotestacea" "Spiroplasma" RIPs are shared by "Spiroplasma" of other mushroom-feeding flies, such as "Megaselia nigra". The "S. poulsonii" strain of "Drosophila melanogaster" can also attack parasitoid wasps, but it's impact on survival of the host fly itself is variable, and dependent on wasp species and strain.


</doc>
<doc id="60010424" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60010424" title="Electric bacteria">
Electric bacteria

Electric bacteria are forms of bacteria that directly consume and excrete electrons at different energy potentials without requiring the metabolization of any sugars or other nutrients. "Shewanella" and "Geobacter" are two known types of electric bacteria. This form of life appears to be especially adapted to low-oxygen environments. Normal life forms require an oxygen environment in which to release the excess of electrons which are produced in metabolizing sugars. In a low oxygen environment, this pathway for releasing electrons is not available. Instead, electric bacteria "breath" metals instead of oxygen, which effectively results in both an intake of and excretion of electrical charges.


</doc>
<doc id="60026694" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60026694" title="Acetomicrobium hydrogeniformans">
Acetomicrobium hydrogeniformans

Acetomicrobium hydrogeniformans is an anaerobic and moderately thermophilic bacterium from the genus of "Acetomicrobium" which has been isolated from oil production water from North Slope Borough in the United States.



</doc>
<doc id="60033993" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60033993" title="Aminiphilus">
Aminiphilus

Aminiphilus is a Gram-negative, non-spore-forming and motile genus of bacteria from the family of Synergistaceae with one known species ("Aminiphilus circumscriptus"). "Aminiphilus circumscriptus" has been isolated from anaerobic sludge from Colombia.


</doc>
<doc id="60034051" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60034051" title="Thermovirga">
Thermovirga

Thermovirga is a Gram-negative, anaerobic and motile genus of bacteria from the family of Synergistaceae with one known species ("Thermovirga lienii"). "Thermovirga lienii" has been isolated from production water from an oil well from the North Sea in Norway.


</doc>
<doc id="60034099" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60034099" title="Thermanaerovibrio">
Thermanaerovibrio

Thermanaerovibrio is a Gram-negative, non-spore-forming chemoorganotrophic and thermophilic genus of bacteria from the family of Synergistaceae.


</doc>
<doc id="60034173" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60034173" title="Thermanaerovibrio velox">
Thermanaerovibrio velox

Thermanaerovibrio velox is a Gram-negative, moderately thermophilic, organotrophic and anaerobic bacterium from the genus of "Thermanaerovibrio" which has been isolated from cyanobacterial mat from Uzon caldera in Russia.



</doc>
<doc id="60034222" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60034222" title="Thermanaerovibrio acidaminovorans">
Thermanaerovibrio acidaminovorans

Thermanaerovibrio acidaminovorans is a moderately thermophilic and anaerobic bacterium from the genus of "Thermanaerovibrio" which has been isolated from granular methanogenic sludge from Breda in the Netherlands.


</doc>
<doc id="60042632" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60042632" title="Cloacibacillus">
Cloacibacillus

Cloacibacillus is a Gram-negative and anaerobic genus of bacteria from the family of Synergistaceae. "Cloacibacillus" bacteria are pathogenic.


</doc>
<doc id="60042670" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60042670" title="Cloacibacillus evryensis">
Cloacibacillus evryensis

Cloacibacillus evryensis is a Gram-negative, anaerobic, mesophilic, rod-shaped and non-motile bacterium from the genus of "Cloacibacillus" which has been isolated from sewage sludge from a wastewater treatment plant from Evry in France.


</doc>
<doc id="60042727" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60042727" title="Cloacibacillus porcorum">
Cloacibacillus porcorum

Cloacibacillus porcorum is a Gram-negative, anaerobic, mesophilic and non-motile bacterium from the genus of "Cloacibacillus" which has been isolated from the intestinal tract of a pig from Ames in the United States.


</doc>
<doc id="60042760" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60042760" title="Aminobacterium">
Aminobacterium

Aminobacterium is a Gram-negative genus of bacteria from the family of Synergistaceae.


</doc>
<doc id="60042848" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60042848" title="Aminobacterium mobile">
Aminobacterium mobile

Aminobacterium mobile is a Gram-negative, anaerobic, mesophilic, non-spore-forming and motile bacterium from the genus of "Aminobacterium" which has been isolated from anaerobic lagoon from a dairy wastewater treatment plant in Colombia. Dissimilar to "Aminobacterium colombiense", Aminobacterium mobile has a marginally lower DNA GC-content (44 mol% vs 46 mol%.) "Aminobacterium mobile" is motile and ferments Serine to Acetate and Alanine. "Aminobacterium mobile" is both a Heterotroph and Asaccharolytic. Its adverse effects on both animals and humans are not yet known, but because of the ability of "Aminobacterium mobile" to degrade amino acids and peptides, the possibility of harmful effects cannot be excluded. 


</doc>
<doc id="60042873" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60042873" title="Aminobacterium colombiense">
Aminobacterium colombiense

Aminobacterium colombiense is a Gram-negative, mesophilic, strictly anaerobic and non-spore-forming bacterium from the genus of "Aminobacterium" which has been isolated from anaerobic lagoon from a dairy wastewater treatment plant in Colombia.



</doc>
<doc id="60042926" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60042926" title="Aminobacterium thunnarium">
Aminobacterium thunnarium

Aminobacterium thunnarium is a Gram-negative, anaerobic, mesophilic and non-spore-forming bacterium from the genus of "Aminobacterium" which has been isolated from sludge.


</doc>
<doc id="60058413" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60058413" title="Pyramidobacter">
Pyramidobacter

Pyramidobacter is a Gram-negative genus of bacteria from the family of Synergistaceae with one known species ("Pyramidobacter piscolens"). "Pyramidobacter piscolens" has been isolated from the human mouth.


</doc>
<doc id="60058463" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60058463" title="Lactivibrio">
Lactivibrio

Lactivibrio is a genus of bacteria from the family of Synergistaceae with one known species ("Lactivibrio alcoholicus"). "Lactivibrio alcoholicus" has been isolated from mesophilic granular sludge from Tokyo in Japan.


</doc>
<doc id="60058498" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60058498" title="Jonquetella">
Jonquetella

Jonquetella is a Gram-negative and strictly aerobic genus of bacteria from the family of Synergistaceae with one known species ("Lactivibrio alcoholicus"). "Jonquetella anthropi" has been isolated from a human cyst from Montpellier in France.


</doc>
<doc id="60058616" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60058616" title="Fretibacterium">
Fretibacterium

Fretibacterium is a genus of bacteria from the family of Synergistaceae with one known species ("Fretibacterium fastidiosum"). "Fretibacterium fastidiosum" has been isolated from subgingival plaque.


</doc>
<doc id="60058659" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60058659" title="Aminivibrio">
Aminivibrio

Aminivibrio is a Gram-negative genus of bacteria from the family of Synergistaceae with one known species ("Aminivibrio pyruvatiphilus"). "Aminivibrio pyruvatiphilus" has been isolated from soil from a rice field.


</doc>
<doc id="60068367" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60068367" title="Nautilia">
Nautilia

Nautilia is a genus of bacteria from the family of Synergistaceae.


</doc>
<doc id="60076031" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60076031" title="Nitratifractor">
Nitratifractor

Nitratifractor is a genus of bacteria from the family of unclassified Campylobacterales with one known species ("Nitratifractor salsuginis").


</doc>
<doc id="60255469" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60255469" title="Coprothermobacter platensis">
Coprothermobacter platensis

Coprothermobacter platensis is a species of moderately thermophilic and strictly anaerobic bacterium belonging to the family Coprothermobacteraceae within the phylum Coprothermobacterota.

Like another species in the genus, "Coprothermobacter proteolyticus", these bacteria are proteolytic, enabling them to break down proteins in anaerobic conditions. In "C. platensis", this capability is related to the source from where this bacterium was firstly isolated, the sludge blanket of a methanogenic, mesophilic anaerobic reactor used for the treatment of protein-rich wastewater from a baker's yeast factory, in Uruguay (region bounded by the "Rio de la Plata" river, giving rise to the name "platensis" for this species, though this bacterium was not isolated from the river).

The bacterial cells are straight, rod-shaped, about 1.5-2 μm long and 0.5 μm in diameter, non-motile, non-spore-forming and stain Gram-negative.
The temperature conditions for growing range from 35 to 65°C, with an optimum temperature of 55°C at pH values close to neutrality; optimum pH is about 7.0, though this bacterium tolerates pH conditions ranging from 4.3 to 8.3.


</doc>
<doc id="60489063" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60489063" title="Mariniflexile">
Mariniflexile

Mariniflexile is a genus in the phylum Bacteroidetes (Bacteria). The various species have been recovered from sea water, sea urchins, springs, brackish water, and an oyster.

The name "Mariniflexile" derives from: Latin adjective "marinus." Latin participle adjective "flexilis" -"e", pliant, pliable, flexible; New Latin neuter gender noun "Mariniflexile", is a marine bacterium. The bacteria are rods, aerobic, move by gliding, gram negative, non-spore forming, and when grown on appropriate medium, the colonies are orange.

The genus contains six species:



</doc>
<doc id="46543992" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=46543992" title="Vampirovibrio chlorellavorus">
Vampirovibrio chlorellavorus

Vampirovibrio chorellavorus is a 0.6 µm pleomorphic cocci with a gram negative cell wall, and is one of the few known predatory bacteria. Unlike many bacteria, "Vampirovibrio chlorellavorus" is an obligate parasite, attaching to the cell wall of green algae of the genus "Chlorella". "Vampirovibrio" originates from the Serbian "vampir" (Cyrillic: вампир). meaning vampire (due to the nature of sucking out cellular contents of its prey) and "vibrio" referring to the bacterial genus of curved rod bacterium. "Chlorellavorus" is named for the host of the bacterium ("Chlorella)" and the Latin "voro" meaning "to devour" ("Chlorella"-devouring).

The bacterium, first described by Gromov and Mamkayeva in 1972, was originally classified in the genus "Bdellovibrio". It was then reclassified as its own genus "Vampirovibrio" in 1980 after being excluded from the genus "Bdellovibrio" for some essential discrepancies. The most significant difference was that members of "Bdellovibrio" are extracellular parasites, both residing and dividing in the periplasmic space in its host, whereas "Vampirovibrio" is epibiotic, attaching to the cell wall of green algae in the genus "Chlorella". It was also thought that the bacterium utilized a thin, uncovered flagellum for motility. However, it was later discovered that the bacterium was non-motile, further differentiating it from members of "Bdellovibrio".

Further research however suggests that the latest classification of "V. chlorellavorus" is still incorrect. By analyzing the genome of "V. chlorellavorus" Soo and Hugenholtz determined that the organism was more accurately a Cyanobacteria rather than a Proteobacteria. Using 16S rRNA analysis, scientists have estimated that this bacterium most closely belongs to the SM1D11 lineage of bacteria. In addition, when compared to other Cyanobacteria, "Vampirovibrio" is non-photosynthetic and could possibly belong to a new proposed classification called "Melainobacteria", from Greek root words meaning “nymph of dark waters.”. It has been subsequently concluded that phylum Cyanobacteria, proposed class Melainabacteria, order Vampirovibrionales, and family Vampirovibrionaceae more accurately classified the organism.

"Vampirovibrio chlorellavorus" is a gram-negative obligate aerobic and epibiotic parasitic bacterium with a curved comma shape. The bacterium attaches to the surface of green algae of the genus "Chlorella". "V". "chlorellavorus" is an extracellular parasite and remains attached to the cell wall. Once attached to its host, "V. chlorellavorus" divides by binary fission, destroying its host in the process by “sucking out” all of the cellular contents via peripheral vacuoles much like a vampire (hence the name "Vampirovibrio"). "V. chlorellavorus" leaves behind only the cell wall and cytoplasmic membrane of "Chromatium" along with a few intracytoplasmic inclusions. "V. chlorellavorus" will not grow in axenic cultures, depending on access to living cells of its preferred algae host, "Chlorella vulgaris" for reproduction. The "Vampirovibrio" life cycle consists of: prey location, attachment, ingestion, binary division, and release.

Gromov and Mamkaeva first isolated "Bdellovibrio chlorellavorus" in a lysis experiment with the algae "Chlorella vulgaris" from Ukrainian reservoir waters from a mass culture of "Chlorella Beijer" in 1966. In a later experiment, the scientists were then able to cultivate "B. chlorellavorus" together with "Chlorella vulgaris" at 24 degrees Celsius and pH 6.8 in a liquid agar solution under fluorescent lighting (at an average of 2100 lux).

Dr. Hugenholtz and colleagues from the University of Queensland in Australia, have completed shotgun sequencing of lyophilized cells of "V. chlorellavourus" strain in culture with "Chlorella vulgaris." Subsequently, Soo and Hugenholtz's team performed a genomic reconstruction in 2014 from a culture previously deposited into the NCBI collection in 1978 and were able to make a general metabolic reconstruction of the genome They found that "V. chlorellavorus" uses a type IV secretion system (T4SS), similar to that of "Agrobacterium tumefaciens" for host invasion, which is conserved in all three copies of the "V. chlorellavorus" genome. To locate its prey, "V. chlorellavorus" seems to be equipped with possible genes for aerotaxis and light activated kinase (moving towards light), suggesting that it might be motile as was originally thought. To digest its algal prey, "V. chlorellavorus" has over 100 hydrolytic enzymes including proteases and peptidases. From the results of Soo and her team's genomic analysis, "V. chlorellavorus" has approximately 26 contigs, 2.91 Mbp, an average GC content of 51.4%, and 2 circular plasmids. In keeping with its description as non-photosynthetic and parasitic microorganism, "V. chlorellavorus" does not have its own genes for photosynthesis or carbon fixation. "V. chlorellavorus" is however capable of synthesizing its own nucleotides, certain cofactors and vitamins, and 15 different amino acids. Its bacterial genome also includes coding for a complete glycolysis pathway as well as an electron transport chain.

"Vampirovibrio" or "Bdellovibrio" may be used to help control harmful populations of bacteria due to their predatory nature. In an experiment where "Bdellovibrio" were added to a shrimp tank to consume populations of bacteria, the target bacterial populations declined by up to 44%. However the "Bdellovibrio" population declined as well after consuming most of the available bacteria. Therefore, use of "Bdellovibrio" as an inhibitor of other bacteria shows potential, but may be limited to certain cases as "Bdellovibrio" prefers certain strains, such as gram-negative bacteria. In a subsequent experiment, chickens, highly susceptible to cecal or gut infections, were used in an experiment in which scientists purposely infected chickens with a pathogenic form of "Salmonella enterica". The chicken were then exposed to "Bdellovibrio bacteriovorus", after which a reduction in inflammation and other harmful changes in the chickens’ ceca were observed as a result of decreased "Salmonella" populations. The success of this experiment suggest there is significant potential for "Bdellovibrio" in bioremediation. Since "Vampirovibrio chlorellavorus" has not been cultured in recent years, it is possible to learn about its future research applications by learning about the methods in which "Bdellovibrio" and like organisms, or BALOs, are used to control pathogenic bacteria.



</doc>
<doc id="60749159" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60749159" title="Corynebacterium striatum">
Corynebacterium striatum

Corynebacterium striatum is a prokaryotic bacterium that is a member of the Corynebacterium genus. It is classified as non-diphtheritic. The bacterium is a gram-positive prokaryote that assumes a 'club-like' morphology, more formally known as a corynebacteria structure. It is non-lipophilic and undergoes aerobic respiration and is also a facultative anaerobe it is catalase negative and oxidase positive glucose and sucrose fermenter.

It is generally found as a ubiquitous microorganism, and, as a commensal of humans, colonising the nasopharynx. It has recently been recognised as an emerging pathogen although the genus of "Corynebacterium" is not usually considered to be pathogenic. Particularly in the context of human disease, "Corynebacterium striatum" is generally considered an opportunistic pathogenic, particularly in a nosocomial setting. It has been recorded to infect the skin, upper and lower respiratory tract and even disseminate, resulting in septicaemia. Recent interest has been sparked in the microorganism as it is known to be resistant to and gaining resistances to many antibiotics.

"Corynebacterium striatum" is a member of the genus "Corynebacterium". Initially the species was described in 1901. Scientific papers dating back until approximately 1980 recount cases of commensal "Corynebacterium striatum" contaminating samples from sites of infections. A paper published in 1993 found that isolates of described Corynebacterium Stratum stored by the American Type Culture Collection and the National Collection of Type Cultures were in fact not that of "Corynebacterium striatum", although the recorded sequences corresponded with other known isolates of the species. From this it was determined that at the time of isolation for storage, the incorrect bacteria was stored. Up until 1993 there had only been three documented cases of respiratory infections caused by the species. After this it was formally defined again in 1995. Coryneform bacteria had for a long time been described as commensals of humans, colonising the skin and mucous membranes without causing disease. More recently "Corynebacterium striatum" was found to in fact be the cause of infection and disease, given the opportunity. Early clinical testing of hospital patients found that infection generally only occurred in immunocompromised individuals or those that had some for of prosthetic device permanently or intermittently fitted. Not long after, researchers began to propose the notion that "Corynebacterium striatum" was the cause of disease even in patients that did not meet such criteria.

Standardised methods of identification have been developed to improve the identification and isolation of Coronyforms. One such method is the API Coryne V2.0 system. API strips combine a series of small scale biochemical tests to distinguish key characteristics of bacterium, based on metabolic activity. The results are interpreted via standardised indicators and charts. This is a cost-effective yet time-consuming method of identification, taking approximately 16 hours, particularly in clinical settings.

More modern identification techniques include genome sequencing – particularly 16S Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) Sequencing. This technique relies on computerised comparison of genome sequences between bacterium. The 16S rRNA sequence is highly conserved between bacterium, although will show slight variations and mutations between strains. Comparison of variations in the "Corynebacterium" genome allow for specific identification of the "Corynebacterium Striatum". It must be noted that currently this is currently a relatively expensive method of identification – when compared to the API strip, although this is improving as technologies improve. The MALDI-TOF system is a clinically relevant method of detection that provides a rapid, 10 minute specific identification of bacteria.

Both biochemical and molecular identification is accompanied by physical characterisation. Culturing the bacteria on blood cultures and gram staining to confirm morphology are integral additions to the process of identification.

"Corynebacterium striatum" is a gram-positive bacterium, meaning they have a thin external peptidoglycan cell wall structure. They have been described as having an irregular pleomorphic shape, and are non-motile. Under a microscope they appearing as a hybrid of a bacillus and cocci morphology with a bulged pole attached to rod like end, more commonly described as a 'club-like' structure. They are broadly described as being 1.5-8.0 micrometers in length, but formal measurement of individual clinical isolates will vary upon observation. "C. striatum" colonies are able to be plated in vitro; when growing on Blood Agar the colonies will appear as small (1-2mm diameter) with a white, moist, and smooth appearance. It is otherwise called a diphtheroid or coryneform due to its close phylogenetic relationship with diphtheria causing bacterium "Corynebacterium diphtheriae".

"Corynebacterium striatum" can be differentiated from other "Corynebacterium" types based on its ability to ferment glucose and sucrose, and inability to ferment maltose. In comparison to other members of the genus "Corynebacterium", it ferments sugars rapidly. Corynebacterium species are also known to ferment nitrates. It is also able to hydrolyse Tyrosine and Pyrazinamide. It does not metabolize urease, can hydrolyze esculin, and can also ferment mannitol and xylose. In a laboratory setting, it is best distinguished from other coronyforms through its fermentative activity. They are non-lipophilic preferring to persist

The organism itself possesses few virulence factors, giving it the title of an opportunistic colonizer as opposed to a true pathogen. Virulence arises from its antibiotic resistance properties. The increasing acquisition of antibiotic resistance genes allow for pathogenesis of "Corynebacterium striatum colonisation".

Antibiotic resistance is the acquisition of resistance to antibiotic treatments through either horizontal gene transfer or genetic mutation. The acquisition of such characteristics by "Corynebacterium striatum" is relevant to its occurrence as a pathogen.

One study found that 93.7% of "Corynebacterium striatum" strains isolated showed resistance to at least one of the antimicrobial compounds tested. In this experiment, 82.5% of strains expressed resistance to the antibiotic Penicillin. Researchers deduced that due to the long-term exposure of "Corynebacterium striatum" to Penicillin resistance had been acquired by most isolates. In the same experiment, multi drug resistance was observed in 49.2% of strains.

"Corynebacterium striatum" has been found to carry the "bla" gene. This gene encodes a class A β-lactamase. β-lactamase are a group of antimicrobial enzymes that work to counter the effect of β-lactam antibiotics such as ampicillin and penicillin.

Further genes associated with antibiotic resistance include, but are not limited to: the gyrA gene which is attributed to resistance to the major antibiotic group fluoroquinolones, the "aph"("3"′)"-Ic" gene imparting resistant to kanamycin, "aph"("3"″)"-Ib" and "aph"("6")"-Id" causing resistant to streptomycin. Researchers also found that the "erm"("X") gene causes resistant to erythromycin

Infection with "Corynebacterium striatum" was initially thought to occur through self-infection, transmitting the bacteria from a site where it persists as commensal and then allowing it to colonise in a situation as a pathogen. It is now understood that it can be transmitted person to person, particularly in a hospital setting.

While "Corynebacterium" infections are not common, when they have been observed it is in individuals with prosthetic devices or those who are immunosuppressed. When detected under these conditions it is considered a true pathogen. Non-diphtheria Corynebacterium types are also being recognised for their impact on those suffering from long term respiratory disease.

Many cases of infection with "Corynebacterium striatum" have been documented with particular relevance to acquisition of infection in hospitals – otherwise known as a nosocomial infection. "Corynebacterium striatum" has been known to colonise prosthetics, particularly heart valves, prosthetic joints and even intravenous apparatus such as catheters. Infections of this type have been described as a local infection or they can progress into a larger disseminated infection otherwise known as bacteraemia. Other documented infections include osteomyelitis, an infection of the bone that can occur through blood born infection or injury to the bone itself.

One of the first described infections of an individual with Corynebacterium striatum occurred in 1980. The man was severely immunocompromised, suffering already from leukemia. After this, a number of isolated cases were documented. A well documented outbreak, at the Hospital Joan March, Mallorca, Spain, saw 21 individuals infected with "Corynebacterium striatum". The individuals all suffered from chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and had also had significant tobacco exposure through their life, and as such were consistently being admitted to the hospital where they were treated by care staff with shared equipment. In this instance "Corynebacterium striatum" was causing infection in the respiratory tract of patients and detected in sputum samples. Of the 21 cases in the outbreak, there were six associated deaths.

Another study of infection with "Corynebacterium striatum" described a patient who was admitted to hospital for treatment of cardiac arrest in 2008. During her stay the patient was fitted with a central venous catheter through which she contracted bacteraemia of "Corynebacterium striatum" which resulted in her death. The patient's age and immuno-compromised state resulting from pre-existing renal failure ultimately allowed for the establishment and dissemination of infection.

There is little to no evidence for Corynebacterium Striatum infection or colonising animal specimens.

Multidrug resistance is the main factor considered when treating disease caused by "Corynebacterium striatum". Treatment with a mix of broad-spectrum antibiotics may thus be necessary. The selection of further antibiotic resistance is a serious consideration that must be made when selecting patient treatment. A study into the occurrence of non-diphtheroid infections determined that of all bacterium tested, "Corynebacterium Striatum" had the highest occurrence"," accounting for 47% of infections. In the same study, it was determined that all non-diphtheroid corynebacterium were susceptible to treatment with vancomycin, quinupristin-dalfopristin, linezolid and gentamicin. While multiple studies confirmed that vancomycin was highly effective on all isolated species. Previously it was known that "Coronybacterium" were susceptible to β-lactams, tetracycline, and fluoroquinolones, but recently, resistance genes to such treatments have been observed in clinical isolates. Similar resistance was noted in a study with all isolates showing resistance to ciprofloxacin. Of significant clinical significance is a rising resistance to beta-lactams in the last two decades, a group of antibiotics that includes penicillin. Suggested oral treatments include a class of oxazolidinones - linezolid. Although treatment with linezolid is not often prescribed as sustained treatment can affect liver function and have negative side effects including headaches and nausea. Although differing results of susceptibility to antibiotic treatment has been noted between experiments, as such specific susceptibility of isolates should be obtained through antibiotic sensitivity testing. In clinical situations the antibiotic sensitivity can be obtained through disk diffusion assays of E-strip test. Treatment of clinical cases, such as the outbreak at the Hospital Joan March, were treated case by case, based on the antibiogram obtained from each patient's sputum sample.

More broadly, prevention of initial infection, particularly in a hospital setting, is a key element of treatment. Sterilising all surfaces, and prostheses, as well as constant replacement and maintenance of prosthesis, is an integral element of stopping disease establishment.


</doc>
<doc id="60758873" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60758873" title="Chlorobactane">
Chlorobactane

Chlorobactane is the diagenetic product of an aromatic carotenoid produced uniquely by green-pigmented green sulfur bacteria (GSB) in the order "Chlorobiales". Observed in organic matter as far back as the Paleoproterozoic, its identity as a diagnostic biomarker has been used to interpret ancient environments.

Chlorobactene is a monocyclic accessory pigment used by green sulfur bacteria to capture electrons from wavelengths in the visible light spectrum. Green sulfur bacteria (GSB) live in anaerobic and sulfidic (euxinic) zones in the presence of light, so they are found most often in meromictic lakes and ponds, sediments, and certain regions of the Black Sea. The enzyme CrtU converts γ-carotene into chlorobactene by shifting the C17 methyl group from the C1 site to the C2 site.

Following transport and burial, diagenetic processes saturate the hydrocarbon chain, turning it into the fully saturated structure of chlorobactane.

Isoreneiratene is an aromatic light-harvesting molecule interpreted as a biomarker for brown-pigmented GSB in the same order, "Chlorobiales", and its fossil form (isoreneiratane) is often found co-occurring with chlorobactene in ancient organic material. Purple sulfur bacteria (PSB) also live in euxinic regions. They produce a different accessory pigment, okenone, that is preserved as okenane and often observed co-occurring with chlorobactane.

Organic molecules are first extracted from rocks using solvents, capitalizing on chemical properties like the polarity of the molecules to dissolve the molecules. Usually, less than one percent of the organic material from a rock is successfully pulled out in this process, leaving behind undissolved material called kerogen. The organic-rich extract is subsequently purified using silica gel column packed chromatography – eluting the extract through the column with targeted solvents pulls out contaminants and remnant undissolved organic material, which will bind to the polar silica moieties. When the sample is then run through a gas chromatography (GC) column, the compounds separate based on their boiling points and interaction with a stationary phase within the column. The temperature ramping of a gas chromatography column can be programmed to obtain optimal separation of the compounds. After the GC, the molecules are ionized and fragmented into smaller, charged molecules. A mass spectrometer then separates the individual compounds based on their mass-to-charge (M/Z) ratio and measures their relative abundance, producing a characteristic mass spectrum. Peaks representing the relative abundance of the compounds are identified as molecules based on their relative retention times, matches to a library of mass spectra with known compound identities, and comparison to standards.

Because green-pigmented green sulfur bacteria require higher light intensities than their brown-pigmented counterparts, the presence of chlorobactane in the rock record has been used as key evidence in interpretations for a very shallow euxinic layer in the ocean. The euxinic zone may have changed depth in the ocean at various points in Earth's history, such as with the advent of an oxygenated atmosphere around 2.45 billion years ago and the shallowing of the oxic zone within the last six kyr.



</doc>
<doc id="60999736" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60999736" title="Thioreductor">
Thioreductor

Thioreductor is a Gram-negative, mesophilic, hydrogen-oxidizing, sulfur-reducing and motile genus of bacteria from the family of unclassified Epsilonproteobacteria with one known species ("Thioreductor micantisoli"). "Thioreductor micantisoli" has been isolated from hydrothermal sediments from the Iheya North from the Mid-Okinawa Trough in Japan.


</doc>
<doc id="43093" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=43093" title="Flagellum">
Flagellum

A flagellum (; plural: flagella) is a lash-like appendage that protrudes from the cell body of certain bacteria and eukaryotic cells termed as flagellates. A flagellate can have one or several flagella. The primary function of a flagellum is that of locomotion, but it also often functions as a sensory organelle, being sensitive to chemicals and temperatures outside the cell. The similar structure in the archaea functions in the same way but is structurally different and has been termed the archaellum.

Flagella are organelles defined by function rather than structure. Flagella vary greatly. Both prokaryotic and eukaryotic flagella can be used for swimming but they differ greatly in protein composition, structure, and mechanism of propulsion. The word in Latin means whip.

An example of a flagellated bacterium is the ulcer-causing "Helicobacter pylori", which uses multiple flagella to propel itself through the mucus lining to reach the stomach epithelium. An example of a eukaryotic flagellate cell is the mammalian sperm cell, which uses its flagellum to propel itself through the female reproductive tract. Eukaryotic flagella are structurally identical to eukaryotic cilia, although distinctions are sometimes made according to function or length. Fimbriae and pili are also thin appendages, but have different functions and are usually smaller.

Three types of flagella have so far been distinguished: bacterial, archaeal, and eukaryotic.

The main differences among these three types are:


The bacterial flagellum is made up of the protein flagellin. Its shape is a 20-nanometer-thick hollow tube. It is helical and has a sharp bend just outside the outer membrane; this "hook" allows the axis of the helix to point directly away from the cell. A shaft runs between the hook and the basal body, passing through protein rings in the cell's membrane that act as bearings. Gram-positive organisms have two of these basal body rings, one in the peptidoglycan layer and one in the plasma membrane. Gram-negative organisms have four such rings: the L ring associates with the lipopolysaccharides, the P ring associates with peptidoglycan layer, the M ring is embedded in the plasma membrane, and the S ring is directly attached to the plasma membrane. The filament ends with a capping protein.

The flagellar filament is the long, helical screw that propels the bacterium when rotated by the motor, through the hook. In most bacteria that have been studied, including the Gram-negative "Escherichia coli, Salmonella typhimurium, Caulobacter crescentus", and "Vibrio alginolyticus", the filament is made up of 11 protofilaments approximately parallel to the filament axis. Each protofilament is a series of tandem protein chains. However, "Campylobacter jejuni" has seven protofilaments.

The basal body has several traits in common with some types of secretory pores, such as the hollow, rod-like "plug" in their centers extending out through the plasma membrane. The similarities between bacterial flagella and bacterial secretory system structures and proteins provide scientific evidence supporting the theory that bacterial flagella evolved from the type-three secretion system.

The bacterial flagellum is driven by a rotary engine (Mot complex) made up of protein, located at the flagellum's anchor point on the inner cell membrane. The engine is powered by proton motive force, i.e., by the flow of protons (hydrogen ions) across the bacterial cell membrane due to a concentration gradient set up by the cell's metabolism ("Vibrio" species have two kinds of flagella, lateral and polar, and some are driven by a sodium ion pump rather than a proton pump). The rotor transports protons across the membrane, and is turned in the process. The rotor alone can operate at 6,000 to 17,000 rpm, but with the flagellar filament attached usually only reaches 200 to 1000 rpm. The direction of rotation can be changed by the flagellar motor switch almost instantaneously, caused by a slight change in the position of a protein, FliG, in the rotor. The flagellum is highly energy efficient and uses very little energy. The exact mechanism for torque generation is still poorly understood. Because the flagellar motor has no on-off switch, the protein epsE is used as a mechanical clutch to disengage the motor from the rotor, thus stopping the flagellum and allowing the bacterium to remain in one place.

The cylindrical shape of flagella is suited to locomotion of microscopic organisms; these organisms operate at a low Reynolds number, where the viscosity of the surrounding water is much more important than its mass or inertia.

The rotational speed of flagella varies in response to the intensity of the proton motive force, thereby permitting certain forms of speed control, and also permitting some types of bacteria to attain remarkable speeds in proportion to their size; some achieve roughly 60 cell lengths per second. At such a speed, a bacterium would take about 245 days to cover 1 km; although that may seem slow, the perspective changes when the concept of scale is introduced. In comparison to macroscopic life forms, it is very fast indeed when expressed in terms of number of body lengths per second. A cheetah, for example, only achieves about 25 body lengths per second.

Through use of their flagella, "E. coli" is able to move rapidly towards attractants and away from repellents, by means of a biased random walk, with 'runs' and 'tumbles' brought about by rotating its flagellum counterclockwise and clockwise, respectively. The two directions of rotation are not identical (with respect to flagellum movement) and are selected by a molecular switch.

During flagellar assembly, components of the flagellum pass through the hollow cores of the basal body and the nascent filament. During assembly, protein components are added at the flagellar tip rather than at the base. "In vitro", flagellar filaments assemble spontaneously in a solution containing purified flagellin as the sole protein.

At least 10 protein components of the bacterial flagellum share homologous proteins with the type three secretion system (TTSS), hence one likely evolved from the other. Because the TTSS has a similar number of components as a flagellar apparatus (about 25 proteins), which one evolved first is difficult to determine. However, the flagellar system appears to involve more proteins overall, including various regulators and chaperones, hence it has been argued that flagella evolved from a TTSS. However, it has also been suggested that the flagellum may have evolved first or the two structures evolved in parallel. Early single-cell organisms' need for motility (mobility) support that the more mobile flagella would be selected by evolution first, but the TTSS evolving from the flagellum can be seen as 'reductive evolution', and receives no topological support from the phylogenetic trees. The hypothesis that the two structures evolved separately from a common ancestor accounts for the protein similarities between the two structures, as well as their functional diversity.

Some authors have argued that flagella cannot have evolved, assuming that they can only function properly when all proteins are in place In other words, the flagellar apparatus is "irreducibly complex". However, many proteins can be deleted or mutated and the flagellum still works, though sometimes at reduced efficiency. In addition, the composition of flagella is surprisingly diverse across bacteria, with many proteins only found in some species, but not others. Hence, the flagellar apparatus is clearly very flexible in evolutionary terms and perfectly able to lose or gain protein components. For instance, a number of mutations have been found that "increase" the motility of "E. coli". Additional evidence for the evolution of bacterial flagella includes the existence of vestigial flagella, intermediate forms of flagella and patterns of similarities among flagellar protein sequences, including the observation that almost all of the core flagellar proteins have known homologies with non-flagellar proteins. Furthermore, several processes have been identified as playing important roles in flagellar evolution, including self-assembly of simple repeating subunits, gene duplication with subsequent divergence, recruitment of elements from other systems (‘molecular bricolage’) and recombination.

Different species of bacteria have different numbers and arrangements of flagella.

In certain large forms of "Selenomonas", more than 30 individual flagella are organized outside the cell body, helically twining about each other to form a thick structure (easily visible with the light microscope) called a "fascicle".

Spirochetes, in contrast, have flagella arising from opposite poles of the cell, and are located within the periplasmic space as shown by breaking the outer-membrane and more recently by electron cryotomography microscopy. The rotation of the filaments relative to the cell body causes the entire bacterium to move forward in a corkscrew-like motion, even through material viscous enough to prevent the passage of normally flagellated bacteria.

Counterclockwise rotation of a monotrichous polar flagellum pushes the cell forward with the flagellum trailing behind, much like a corkscrew moving inside cork. Indeed, water on the microscopic scale is highly viscous, very different from our daily experience of water.

Flagella are left-handed helices, and bundle and rotate together only when rotating counterclockwise. When some of the rotors reverse direction, the flagella unwind and the cell starts "tumbling". Even if all flagella would rotate clockwise, they likely will not form a bundle, due to geometrical, as well as hydrodynamic reasons. Such "tumbling" may happen occasionally, leading to the cell seemingly thrashing about in place, resulting in the reorientation of the cell. The clockwise rotation of a flagellum is suppressed by chemical compounds favorable to the cell (e.g. food), but the motor is highly adaptive to this. Therefore, when moving in a favorable direction, the concentration of the chemical attractant increases and "tumbles" are continually suppressed; however, when the cell's direction of motion is unfavorable (e.g., away from a chemical attractant), tumbles are no longer suppressed and occur much more often, with the chance that the cell will be thus reoriented in the correct direction.

In some "Vibrio" spp. (particularly "Vibrio parahaemolyticus") and related proteobacteria such as "Aeromonas", two flagellar systems co-exist, using different sets of genes and different ion gradients for energy. The polar flagella are constitutively expressed and provide motility in bulk fluid, while the lateral flagella are expressed when the polar flagella meet too much resistance to turn. These provide swarming motility on surfaces or in viscous fluids.

The archaellum possessed by some archeae is superficially similar to the bacterial flagellum; in the 1980s, they were thought to be homologous on the basis of gross morphology and behavior. Both flagella and archaella consist of filaments extending outside the cell, and rotate to propel the cell. Archaeal flagella have a unique structure which lacks a central channel. Similar to bacterial type IV pilins, the archaeal flagellins (archaellins) are made with class 3 signal peptides and they are processed by a type IV prepilin peptidase-like enzyme. The archaellins are typically modified by the addition of N-linked glycans which are necessary for proper assembly or function.

Discoveries in the 1990s revealed numerous detailed differences between the archaeal and bacterial flagella. These include:


These differences could mean that the bacterial flagella and archaella could be a classic case of biological analogy, or convergent evolution, rather than homology.However, in comparison to the decades of well-publicized study of bacterial flagella (e.g. by Howard Berg), archaella have only recently begun to garner scientific attention.

Aiming to emphasize the distinction between the bacterial flagella and the eukaryotic cilia and flagella, some authors attempted to replace the name of these two eukaryotic structures with "undulipodia" (e.g., all papers by Margulis since the 1970s) or "cilia" for both (e.g., Hülsmann, 1992; Adl et al., 2012; most papers of Cavalier-Smith), preserving "flagella" for the bacterial structure. However, the discriminative usage of the terms "cilia" and "flagella" for eukaryotes adopted in this article is still common (e.g., Andersen et al., 1991; Leadbeater et al., 2000).

A eukaryotic flagellum is a bundle of nine fused pairs of microtubule doublets surrounding two central single microtubules. The so-called "9 + 2" structure is characteristic of the core of the eukaryotic flagellum called an axoneme. At the base of a eukaryotic flagellum is a basal body, "blepharoplast" or kinetosome, which is the microtubule organizing center for flagellar microtubules and is about 500 nanometers long. Basal bodies are structurally identical to centrioles. The flagellum is encased within the cell's plasma membrane, so that the interior of the flagellum is accessible to the cell's cytoplasm.

Besides the axoneme and basal body, relatively constant in morphology, other internal structures of the flagellar apparatus are the transition zone (where the axoneme and basal body meet) and the root system (microtubular or fibrilar structures which extends from the basal bodies into the cytoplasm), more variable and useful as indicators of phylogenetic relationships of eukaryotes. Other structures, more uncommon, are the paraflagellar (or paraxial, paraxonemal) rod, the R fiber, and the S fiber. For surface structures, see below.

Each of the outer 9 doublet microtubules extends a pair of dynein arms (an "inner" and an "outer" arm) to the adjacent microtubule; these produce force through ATP hydrolysis. The flagellar axoneme also contains radial spokes, polypeptide complexes extending from each of the outer nine microtubule doublets towards the central pair, with the "head" of the spoke facing inwards. The radial spoke is thought to be involved in the regulation of flagellar motion, although its exact function and method of action are not yet understood.

The regular beat patterns of eukaryotic cilia and flagella generate motion on a cellular level. Examples range from the propulsion of single cells such as the swimming of spermatozoa to the transport of fluid along a stationary layer of cells such as in the respiratory tract. Though eukaryotic flagella and motile cilia are ultrastructurally identical, the beating pattern of the two organelles can be different. In the case of flagella, the motion is often planar and wave-like, whereas the motile cilia often perform a more complicated three-dimensional motion with a power and recovery stroke.

Intraflagellar transport, the process by which axonemal subunits, transmembrane receptors, and other proteins are moved up and down the length of the flagellum, is essential for proper functioning of the flagellum, in both motility and signal transduction.

Eukaryotic flagella or cilia, probably an ancestral characteristic, are widespread in almost all groups of eukaryotes, as a relatively perennial condition, or as a flagellated life cycle stage (e.g., zoids, gametes, zoospores, which may be produced continually or not).

The first situation is found either in specialized cells of multicellular organisms (e.g., the choanocytes of sponges, or the ciliated epithelia of metazoans), as in ciliates and many eukaryotes with a "flagellate condition" (or "monadoid ", see , an artificial group).

Flagellated lifecycle stages are found in many groups, e.g., many green algae (zoospores and male gametes), bryophytes (male gametes), pteridophytes (male gametes), some gymnosperms (cycads and "Ginkgo", as male gametes), centric diatoms (male gametes), brown algae (zoospores and gametes), oomycetes (assexual zoospores and gametes), hyphochytrids (zoospores), labyrinthulomycetes (zoospores), some apicomplexans (gametes), some radiolarians (probably gametes), foraminiferans (gametes), plasmodiophoromycetes (zoospores and gametes), myxogastrids (zoospores), metazoans (male gametes), and chytrid fungi (zoospores and gametes).

Flagella or cilia are completely absent in some groups, probably due to a loss rather than being a primitive condition. The loss of cilia occurred in red algae, some green algae (Zygnematophyceae), the gymnosperms except cycads and "Ginkgo", angiosperms, pennate diatoms, some apicomplexans, some amoebozoans, in the sperm of some metazoans, and in fungi (except chytrids).

A number of terms related to flagella or cilia are used to characterize eukaryotes. According to surface structures present, flagella may be:

According to the number of flagella, cells may be (remembering that some authors use "ciliated" instead of "flagellated":

According to the place of insertion of the flagella:

According to the beating pattern:

Other terms related to the flagellar type:




</doc>
<doc id="38121093" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38121093" title="Bacillus horikoshii">
Bacillus horikoshii

Bacillus horikoshii is a facultative anaerobe bacterium. It is a gram positive, alkaliphilic and alkalitolerant, aerobic endospore-forming bacteria.



</doc>
<doc id="62012643" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=62012643" title="TM7x">
TM7x

TM7x, also known as "Nanosynbacter lyticus" type strain TM7x HMT 952. is a phylotype of one of the most enigmatic phyla, Candidatus Saccharibacteria, formerly candidate phylum TM7. It is the only member of the candidate phylum that has been cultivated successfully from the human oral cavity, and stably maintained in vitro. and serves as a crucial paradigm. of the newly described Candidate Phyla Radiation (CPR). The cultivated oral taxon is designated as Saccharibacteria oral taxon TM7x (NCBI taxonomy ID: 1476577). TM7x has a unique lifestyle in comparison to other bacteria that are associated with humans. It is an obligate epibiont parasite, or an "epiparasite", growing on the surface of its host bacterial species "Actinomyces odontolyticus" subspecies actinosynbacter strain XH001, which is referred to as the "basibiont". Actinomyces species are one of the early microbial colonizers in the oral cavity. Together, they exhibit parasitic epibiont symbiosis.

The TM7 phylum was named with reference to the Torf, mittlere Schicht (or peat, middle layer) in which it was first detected in a German peat bog. The TM7 phylum correlates positively with various human inflammatory mucosal diseases. such as periodontitis. and particularly those conditions associated with a mature anaerobic biofilm. This is probably by modifying growth conditions for competing bacterial populations. The Saccharibacteria phylum has a cosmopolitan existence, devoid of any cultivable representative for more than 2 decades since the first RNA sequence was recovered. (except the recently cultivated oral taxon TM7x) and has thus been referred to as "microbial dark matter". Saccharibacteria are part of CPR which is a recently described expansion of the tree of life encompassing more than 15% of the bacterial domain, due to shared genomic characteristics with other novel genomes in the domain Bacteria. They display reduced metabolic capabilities and a parasitic lifestyle. along with their ability to promote biofilm formation capability of the host.

TM7x are ultra-small bacteria, with a tiny cell size. They are in the form of small spherical cocci, having a diameter of about 0.2-0.3 µm. and cell volume of approximately 0.009 µm. The TM7x bacteria belong to the TM7 phylum which consist of members that are gram positive in nature. The TM7 organisms have extensive cell wall or cell peptidoglycan metabolism since several cell wall components have high producibility metrics such as peptidoglycan, bactoprenyl diphosphate, and nine different types of teichoic acids.

TM7x is an obligate epibiotic parasite, which means that it lives on the surface of another micro-organism, called the basibiont or bacterial host. Due to its parasitic nature, it disrupts the host cell eventually causing cell death, on which it is dependent for metabolic functions, instead of living as free bacteria. The TM7x cells are host specific, and are physically bound to their host, Actinomyces odontolyticus strain XH001 which are rod shaped. When associated with the host in a co-culture, the epibiont forms a "grape on a vine" structure.

Microscopic examinations have revealed that both TM7x and XH001 display extensive morphological changes during symbiotic growth. Different morphologies of TM7x include cocci, filamentous cell bodies, short rods as well as elongated cells. Based on their morphology, the individual TM7x cells that are attached to XH001 can be classified into cocci, cocci with various tail lengths, two connected cocci, or two slightly separated cocci. The morphologies are observed during all growth phases and resemble budding bacteria thus suggesting that TM7x cells undergo bud formation while attached to XH001, and thus divide by budding. The different morphologies may reflect different budding stages. TM7x also do not have flagella or pili and this suggests that TM7x cells adhere in a directional manner using the cell surface or membrane proteins.

During the lag, exponential and stationary phase, TM7x cells present in the co-culture appear as cocci, although slightly elongated forms are also seen. During the death phase, the TM7x cells show greater elongation, in addition to cocci and short rod morphologies.

TM7x, just like most microbes, has an optimum temperature of 37 °C and requires anaerobic conditions, and studies suggest that an increase in oxygen negatively impacts its growth. These cells are recalcitrant to cultivation due to auxotrophy which is a result of its reduced genome. The cells lack certain metabolic pathways, which means they do not have the ability to synthesize amino acids that are essential for life. Due to this, the TM7x cells are completely dependent on their host to survive. However, the TM7x cells that are unattached to the host are viable. and can re-establish the association with the host when it is available.

TM7x is sensitive to components such as hydrogen peroxide, as well as high concentrations of sodium chloride and potassium chloride. On the other hand, growth of TM7x is apparent when fetal bovine serum is present, however it hampers the growth of its host. It has also been seen that heat shocks of about 42 °C does not alter the balance between the host and TM7x in co-cultures. Due to the attachment between TM7x and XH001, carbon dioxide can also be considered as a necessary component for the growth of TM7x cells, since it is an essential to the host XH001.

Studies conducted on 16S RNA have revealed that TM7x cells are resistant to streptomycin due to certain mutations in their genes.

A stable co-culture of the TM7x and XH001 can be obtained by using a medium, which has been developed to resemble the saliva, called the SHI medium, on solid agar plates, which is an oral culture medium. It is a combination of the critical ingredients of 3 media, namely PYG (peptone-yeast extract-glucose medium), BMM (basal medium mucin) and sheep blood supplemented NAM (N-acetyl muramic acid) to base ingredients such as peptone and yeast extracts. This is a targeted enrichment approach, since the medium is also supplemented with streptomycin. This allows selection of streptomycin resistant strains. For best results, the culture is incubated at 37 °C under anaerobic conditions (85% N, 10% H and 5% CO). One thing to note, however is that TM7x cells associate with XH001 with the highest abundance, under microaerophilic conditions (2.6% oxygen, 5% CO). Subcultures with increasing concentrations of streptomycin can be carried out. SHI media is superior in cultivating saliva derived oral bacteria since it contains mucin, which is the principle glycoprotein of saliva and is an important growth limiting substrate, haemin and NAM which stimulate the growth.

To isolate TM7 from the co-culture, various physical as well as chemical treatments can be used, which involves disrupting the attachment between TM7x and XH001. The co-culture can be passed through a 28-gauge needle, after which it can be filtered using a 0.22 µm filter. Using the medium enrichment technique can reduce the TM7x containing cultures from a complex community to a dual species co culture.

TM7x cells can be observed using microscopic techniques such as light microscopy, Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM), which can be used to describe the microbial cell envelope, Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), which helped characterize the interactions between as XH001 and TM7x, and con-focal laser scanning microscope that distinguishes between the host and TM7x cells. Genetic approaches, such as complete DNA sequencing or whole genome sequencing. and 16S RNA sequencing. define the microbiome, as well as the relationship between TM7x and its host. The TM7x cells can also been observed using microfluidic devices. Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) can be used to observe cell separation. and single cells can be acquired using flow cytometry. to conduct genetic analysis. These methods, in conjunction with well-established sample preparation, staining techniques and co-culturing using enrichment techniques, will allow proper cultivation and sequencing of TM7x cells. Microscopy coupled with recent advances in hardware and software make these methods indispensable.

The two micro-organisms exhibit dynamic interactions, since TM7x is obligately and exclusively physically associated with its host Actinomyces odontolyticus strain XH001, with various phases that include co-existence, induction of lysis in addition to exospore formation. This is an example of parasitic ectosymbiosis. and it represents a novel inter-species interaction in the oral microbiota. Due to the inability to produce its own amino acids, it is apparent that the epibiont is fully dependent on A. odontolyticus XH001 for its nutrients. However, under certain conditions, TM7x can become parasitic, thus killing its host, which is an unusual interaction for oral micro-organisms.

Studies suggest that physical attachment of TM7x with XH001 has both positive and negative effects on the XH001 cells.



The association between TM7x and XH001 shifts from biotrophic (under nutrient replete conditions) to necrotrophic (under starvation or late nutrient deplete conditions). Both TM7x and XH001 show reciprocal changes under varying nutritional conditions:

Under nutritionally replete environments

Under normal conditions, TM7x is an obligate epibiont, and co-exists well. TM7x cells cause slight elongation and branching in XH001 cells, by keeping them healthy, which provides the epibiont with a larger surface area to grow.

Under starvation conditions

Under conditions of starvation, the TM7x cells remain vital and multiply. However, the host cells (XH001) lose their viability, due to disrupted or compromised cell membranes, when associated with TM7x, and some develop exospore-like structures, which result in the drastic reduction the TM7x cells. This negative impact on viability of host cells due to the obligate surface attachment indicates the parasitic nature of TM7x. The TM7x cells display a transformation from small cocci to elongated cells (which may be due to stress response) and induce a variety of severe changes in cell morphologies of XH001, such as swollen cell bodies, clubbed ends, and lysis.

When TM7x cells are co-cultured with other micro-organisms, related to its specific host, such as "A. naeslundii, A. viscosus, A. meyeri", amongst others, no physical association is established. This suggests that TM7x and XH001 might have evolved together during their establishment in the mouth.

The TM7x genome is completely sequenced. and has a more streamlined genome than the other phylotypes, which may be due to its specific human microbiome habitat. The genome is highly reduced (probably due to its dependence on the host). and has a relatively small size of 705 kb (approx. 705,138 bp). It ranks among the smallest bacteria found on the human body or in nature. It reveals a limited metabolic repertoire (complete deficiency in amino acid synthetic capacity), which may explain its dependency on the host and the necessity to parasitize it. It has been postulated that the dependence of TM7x cells on the host has allowed further genome reduction, in comparison to the other TM7 phylotypes.

The genome consists of about 711 genes, of which there are 46 RNA genes, (43 tRNAs and 3 rRNAs), and a protein count of 693. It has a coding density of 93%. and is very dense in the production of toxins as well as virulent molecules, such as cytotoxic necrotizing factor 1, haemolysin toxin protein as well as type III secretion protein. The GC content of the genome is 44.5%. A list of all the core genes, shared by all genomes of Saccharibacteria as well as the unique genes possessed by the TM7x, has been published. A strikingly highly conserved gene synteny has been sustained between a huge fraction of the TM7x genome and the aquifer- and sludge bioreactor-associated TM7. The TM7x genome contains a high number of genes that encode proteins with transmembrane domains, to obtain nutrients from its host XH001, but contains a low gene percentage that encodes proteins with signal peptides.

Various hypotheses are proposed to describe the reductive genomic evolution, which is observed in these host-dependent bacterial lineages, such as the streamlining hypothesis, the black queen hypothesis and the increase of protein multifunctionality. Endosymbiont metabolisms follow inverse evolutionary pathways during genome reduction where some enzymes have relaxed specificity to compensate for gene number reduction.

Transcriptomic data allows analysis and comparisons of gene expressions, profiles of secreted molecules, gene functions and products which are important for successfully establishing a symbiotic relationship. Transcriptomic data shows that about 340 genes in XH001 are differentially regulated under coculture conditions.

Approximately 70 genes belonging to XH001 genes are up-regulated when XH001 is physically associated with TM7x. These include genes that encode functions related to general stress related responses such as stress related proteins and transcriptional regulators, induced turgor stress-related response, a ribosomal subunit interface protein that binds to machinery of the ribosomes, inhibiting protein biosynthesis, Cys-tRNA-Pro deacylase which prevents addition of amino acids to the tRNA molecule, inhibiting protein translation, TA-encoding systems which include toxin component GNAT family, prevent-host death family protein, YefM TA system and addiction module toxin-RelE family; potassium efflux system KefA homolog, biosynthesis of essential amino acids and transporters. Apart from this, studies also suggest that when TM7x is associated with XH001, the gene encoding the "lsr"B ortholog which functions as a receptor for the AI-2 signalling molecule is highly upregulated. Comparatively, the genes encoding potassium uptake, putative membrane proteins, and ompA expression, known to encode an immunogenic protein were down-regulated.

The TM7x cells are capable of several common metabolic processes, such as glycolysis, the TCA cycle, nucleotide biosynthesis and some amino acid biosynthesis and salvage pathways. Genes coding for glycosyl hydrolase family enzymes have been observed, suggesting that these cells may use oligosaccharides as growth substrates, as well as Arginine, which is another potential growth substrate (arginine deiminase pathway). Genes for ABC transporters are also identified that are likely to be responsible for oligopeptide uptake, indicating that TM7 cells are capable of using other amino acids also.

There is evidence of a base substitution in the 16S rRNA genes, which is highly atypical, and is associated with antibiotic resistance against streptomycin. On the consensus 16S rRNA, on position 912, C is substituted with U and this is linked to resistance against streptomycin.

When periodontal disease is initiated due to the pathogens present in microbial biofilms, certain harmful by-products and enzymes are produced that break down the collagen or host cell membranes to allow invasion. Certain inflammatory cytokines induce inflammation when the macrophages detect pathogens as part of its defence mechanism, such as the tumour necrosis factor (α-TNF). TM7x can be considered a potential pathogen since it is associated with inflammatory mucosal disease and detected more frequently at these sites. Studies conducted on J2 immortalized bone marrow macrophages (BMMs) have shown that the host XH001 induces the α-TNF gene expression, however when associated with TM7x cells, this expression is greatly reduced. This indicates that TM7x can suppress the α-TNF gene expression in the macrophages or prevent the detection of its host by macrophages.

TM7x is established as an organism that produces toxins and virulence factors, and encodes membrane associated virulence proteins such as OmpA and LemA, type IV secretion systems, and proteins that bind choline. It is also capable of inducing resistance to streptomycin in its host XH001 and thus pose potential threat to humans, as they are involved in various human systemic diseases. including but not limited to vaginal diseases and chronic inflammation in the digestive tract. Actinomyces species are one of the early microbial colonizers in the oral cavity and the relationship between XH001 with TM7x may influence the composition and pathogenesis of oral microbiota, since a homeostatic balance must be maintained between the host and bacteria.

The TM7x genome contains several open reading frames that encode an abortive infection protein homolog that limits replication of the phage within a bacterial population, also promoting cell death and also encode predicted proteins with toxin-antitoxin (TA) domains, such as VapB, VapC, and xenobiotic response element. These proteins may play roles in the maintenance of the parasitic status of TM7x against XH001.


</doc>
<doc id="60621073" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=60621073" title="Crenobacter cavernea">
Crenobacter cavernea

"Crenobacter cavernea" Cave-375 is a gram negative bacterium that is closely related to a previously discovered "Crenobacter cavernae" strain K1W11S-77ͭ. "C. cavernea" Cave-375 has not directly been described morphologically, however the related strain K1W11S-77ͭ is a "rod-shaped, motile, and strictly aerobic novel bacteria".

Its metabolism has not yet been determined.

"C. cavernea" Cave-375 was first identified from a water sample coming from a dripping stalactite. This stalactite was located in the Algar do Pena cave in the Maciço Calcário Estremenho karst massif in Central Eastern Portugal.
"C. cavernea" Cave-375 was first isolated and "grown on nutrient agar at 25 degrees Celsius".

Its ecology is not yet known. With the sequencing of the genome of "C. cavernea" Cave-375, the ecological impact should be able to be identified.

"C. cavernea" Cave-375 belongs in the "Proteobacteria" phylum, "Neisseriaceae" family, and "Crenobacter cavernea" species. By comparing the 16s rRNA of the CAVE-375 stain to "Crenobacter cavernea" species, a 99% similarity value was calculated. When comparing DNA-DNA hybridization using a Genome-to-Genome Distance Calculator, a 62.66% hybridization percentage was found.

"Genomic DNA was extracted from "C. cavernea" Cave-375 using an NZY microbial gDNA isolation kit (NZYTech, Portugal)". The whole genome was then sequenced using whole genome shotgun sequencing method. With this, "17,325,372 high-quality raw sequences were assembled into 15 contigs with an N₅₀ value of 323,281 and a total genome size of 2,273,143 base pairs (2.9 Mb)". NCBI Prokaryotic Genome Annotation Pipeline was able to identify a 65.9% GC content and sequencing coding for proteins and tRNA. "2,779 protein coding sequences and 63 tRNA sequences" were identified using this method.


</doc>
<doc id="2639864" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2639864" title="Buchnera (bacterium)">
Buchnera (bacterium)

Buchnera aphidicola, a member of the Proteobacteria, is the primary endosymbiont of aphids, and has been studied in the pea aphid, "Acyrthosiphon pisum". "Buchnera" is believed to have had a free-living, Gram-negative ancestor similar to a modern Enterobacterales, such as "Escherichia coli". "Buchnera" is 3 µm in diameter and has some of the key characteristics of their Enterobacterales relatives, such as a Gram-negative cell wall. However, unlike most other Gram-negative bacteria, "Buchnera" lacks the genes to produce lipopolysaccharides for its outer membrane. The long association with aphids and the limitation of crossover events due to strictly vertical transmission has seen the deletion of genes required for anaerobic respiration, the synthesis of amino sugars, fatty acids, phospholipids, and complex carbohydrates. This has resulted not only in one of the smallest known genomes of any living organism, but also one of the most genetically stable.

The symbiotic relationship with aphids began between 160 million and 280 million years ago, and has persisted through maternal transmission and cospeciation. Aphids have developed bacteriocyte cells to house "Buchnera". A mature aphid may carry an estimated 5.6 × 10 "Buchnera" cells. "Buchnera" has lost regulatory factors, allowing continuous overproduction of tryptophan and other amino acids. Each bacteriocyte contains multiple vesicles, symbiosomes derived from the cell membrane.

The sizes of various "Buchnera" genomes are in the range of 600 to 650 kb and encode on the order of 500 to 560 proteins. Many contain also one or two plasmids (2.3 to 11 kb in size).

"Buchnera" also increases the transmission of plant viruses by producing symbionin, a protein that binds to the viral coat and protects it inside the aphid. This makes it more likely that the virion will survive and be able to infect another plant when the aphid next feeds.

"Buchnera" was named after by Paul Baumann and his graduate student, and the first molecular characterization of a symbiotic bacterium was carried out by Baumann, using "Buchnera". The initial studies on "Buchnera" later led to studies on symbionts of many groups of insects, pursued by numerous investigators, including Paul and Linda Baumann, Nancy Moran, Serap Aksoy, and Roy Gross, who together investigated symbionts of aphids, tsetse flies, ants, leafhoppers, mealybugs, whiteflies, psyllids, and others.




</doc>
<doc id="5334607" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5334607" title="Africa">
Africa

Africa is the world's second-largest and second-most populous continent, after Asia. At about 30.3 million km (11.7 million square miles) including adjacent islands, it covers 6% of Earth's total surface area and 20% of its land area. With
/1e9 round 1 billion people as of , it accounts for about 16% of the world's human population. The continent is surrounded by the Mediterranean Sea to the north, the Isthmus of Suez and the Red Sea to the northeast, the Indian Ocean to the southeast and the Atlantic Ocean to the west. The continent includes Madagascar and various archipelagos. It contains 54 fully recognised sovereign states (countries), eight territories and two "de facto" independent states with limited or no recognition. The majority of the continent and its countries are in the Northern Hemisphere, with a substantial portion and number of countries in the Southern Hemisphere.

Africa's average population is the youngest amongst all the continents; the median age in 2012 was 19.7, when the worldwide median age was 30.4. Algeria is Africa's largest country by area, and Nigeria is its largest by population. Africa, particularly central Eastern Africa, is widely accepted as the place of origin of humans and the Hominidae clade (great apes), as evidenced by the discovery of the earliest hominids and their ancestors as well as later ones that have been dated to around 7 million years ago, including "Sahelanthropus tchadensis", "Australopithecus africanus", "A. afarensis", "Homo erectus", "H. habilis" and "H. ergaster"—the earliest "Homo sapiens" (modern human), found in Ethiopia, date to circa 200,000 years ago. Africa straddles the equator and encompasses numerous climate areas; it is the only continent to stretch from the northern temperate to southern temperate zones.

Africa hosts a large diversity of ethnicities, cultures and languages. In the late 19th century, European countries colonised almost all of Africa; most present states in Africa emerged from a process of decolonisation in the 20th century. African nations cooperate through the establishment of the African Union, which is headquartered in Addis Ababa.

"Afri" was a Latin name used to refer to the inhabitants of then-known northern Africa to the west of the Nile river, and in its widest sense referred to all lands south of the Mediterranean (Ancient Libya). This name seems to have originally referred to a native Libyan tribe, an ancestor of modern Berbers; see Terence for discussion. The name had usually been connected with the Phoenician word "" meaning "dust", but a 1981 hypothesis has asserted that it stems from the Berber word "ifri" (plural "ifran") meaning "cave", in reference to cave dwellers. The same word may be found in the name of the Banu Ifran from Algeria and Tripolitania, a Berber tribe originally from Yafran (also known as "Ifrane") in northwestern Libya.

Under Roman rule, Carthage became the capital of the province it then named "Africa Proconsularis", following its defeat of the Carthaginians in the Third Punic War in 146 BC, which also included the coastal part of modern Libya. The Latin suffix "-ica" can sometimes be used to denote a land (e.g., in "Celtica" from "Celtae", as used by Julius Caesar). The later Muslim region of Ifriqiya, following its conquest of the Byzantine (Eastern Roman) Empire's "Exarchatus Africae", also preserved a form of the name.

According to the Romans, Africa lay to the west of Egypt, while "Asia" was used to refer to Anatolia and lands to the east. A definite line was drawn between the two continents by the geographer Ptolemy (85–165 AD), indicating Alexandria along the Prime Meridian and making the isthmus of Suez and the Red Sea the boundary between Asia and Africa. As Europeans came to understand the real extent of the continent, the idea of "Africa" expanded with their knowledge.

Other etymological hypotheses have been postulated for the ancient name "Africa":

Africa is considered by most paleoanthropologists to be the oldest inhabited territory on Earth, with the human species originating from the continent. During the mid-20th century, anthropologists discovered many fossils and evidence of human occupation perhaps as early as 7 million years ago (BP=before present). Fossil remains of several species of early apelike humans thought to have evolved into modern man, such as "Australopithecus afarensis" (radiometrically dated to approximately 3.9–3.0 million years BP, "Paranthropus boisei" (c. 2.3–1.4 million years BP) and "Homo ergaster" (c. 1.9 million–600,000 years BP) have been discovered.

After the evolution of "Homo sapiens" approximately 350,000 to 260,000 years BP in Africa. the continent was mainly populated by groups of hunter-gatherers. These first modern humans left Africa and populated the rest of the globe during the Out of Africa II migration dated to approximately 50,000 years BP, exiting the continent either across Bab-el-Mandeb over the Red Sea, the Strait of Gibraltar in Morocco, or the Isthmus of Suez in Egypt.

Other migrations of modern humans within the African continent have been dated to that time, with evidence of early human settlement found in Southern Africa, Southeast Africa, North Africa, and the Sahara.

The size of the Sahara has historically been extremely variable, with its area rapidly fluctuating and at times disappearing depending on global climatic conditions. At the end of the Ice ages, estimated to have been around 10,500 BC, the Sahara had again become a green fertile valley, and its African populations returned from the interior and coastal highlands in Sub-Saharan Africa, with rock art paintings depicting a fertile Sahara and large populations discovered in Tassili n'Ajjer dating back perhaps 10 millennia. However, the warming and drying climate meant that by 5000 BC, the Sahara region was becoming increasingly dry and hostile. Around 3500 BC, due to a tilt in the earth's orbit, the Sahara experienced a period of rapid desertification. The population trekked out of the Sahara region towards the Nile Valley below the Second Cataract where they made permanent or semi-permanent settlements. A major climatic recession occurred, lessening the heavy and persistent rains in Central and Eastern Africa. Since this time, dry conditions have prevailed in Eastern Africa and, increasingly during the last 200 years, in Ethiopia.

The domestication of cattle in Africa preceded agriculture and seems to have existed alongside hunter-gatherer cultures. It is speculated that by 6000 BC, cattle were domesticated in North Africa. In the Sahara-Nile complex, people domesticated many animals, including the donkey and a small screw-horned goat which was common from Algeria to Nubia.

Around 4000 BC, the Saharan climate started to become drier at an exceedingly fast pace. This climate change caused lakes and rivers to shrink significantly and caused increasing desertification. This, in turn, decreased the amount of land conducive to settlements and helped to cause migrations of farming communities to the more tropical climate of West Africa.

By the first millennium BC, ironworking had been introduced in Northern Africa and around that time also became established in parts of sub-Saharan Africa either through independent invention there or diffusion from the north and by 500 BC, metalworking began to become commonplace in West Africa. Ironworking was fully established by roughly 500 BC in many areas of East and West Africa, although other regions didn't begin ironworking until the early centuries AD. Copper objects from Egypt, North Africa, Nubia, and Ethiopia dating from around 500 BC have been excavated in West Africa, suggesting that Trans-Saharan trade networks had been established by this date.

At about 3300 BC, the historical record opens in Northern Africa with the rise of literacy in the Pharaonic civilization of Ancient Egypt. One of the world's earliest and longest-lasting civilizations, the Egyptian state continued, with varying levels of influence over other areas, until 343 BC. Egyptian influence reached deep into modern-day Libya and Nubia, and, according to Martin Bernal, as far north as Crete.

An independent centre of civilization with trading links to Phoenicia was established by Phoenicians from Tyre on the north-west African coast at Carthage.

European exploration of Africa began with Ancient Greeks and Romans. In 332 BC, Alexander the Great was welcomed as a liberator in Persian-occupied Egypt. He founded Alexandria in Egypt, which would become the prosperous capital of the Ptolemaic dynasty after his death.

Following the conquest of North Africa's Mediterranean coastline by the Roman Empire, the area was integrated economically and culturally into the Roman system. Roman settlement occurred in modern Tunisia and elsewhere along the coast. The first Roman emperor native to North Africa was Septimius Severus, born in Leptis Magna in present-day Libya—his mother was Italian Roman and his father was Punic.

Christianity spread across these areas at an early date, from Judaea via Egypt and beyond the borders of the Roman world into Nubia; by AD 340 at the latest, it had become the state religion of the Aksumite Empire. Syro-Greek missionaries, who arrived by way of the Red Sea, were responsible for this theological development.

In the early 7th century, the newly formed Arabian Islamic Caliphate expanded into Egypt, and then into North Africa. In a short while, the local Berber elite had been integrated into Muslim Arab tribes. When the Umayyad capital Damascus fell in the 8th century, the Islamic centre of the Mediterranean shifted from Syria to Qayrawan in North Africa. Islamic North Africa had become diverse, and a hub for mystics, scholars, jurists, and philosophers. During the above-mentioned period, Islam spread to sub-Saharan Africa, mainly through trade routes and migration.

In West Africa, Dhar Tichitt and Oualata in present-day Mauritania figure prominently among the early urban centers, dated to 2,000 BC. About 500 stone settlements litter the region in the former savannah of the Sahara. Its inhabitants fished and grew millet. It has been found Augustin Holl that the Soninke of the Mandé peoples were likely responsible for constructing such settlements. Around 300 BC the region became more desiccated and the settlements began to decline, most likely relocating to Koumbi Saleh. Architectural evidence and the comparison of pottery styles suggest that Dhar Tichitt was related to the subsequent Ghana Empire. Djenné-Djenno (in present-day Mali) was settled around 300 BC, and the town grew to house a sizable Iron Age population, as evidenced by crowded cemeteries. Living structures were made of sun-dried mud. By 250 BC Djenné-Djenno had become a large, thriving market town.

Farther south, in central Nigeria, around 1,000 BC, the Nok culture developed on the Jos Plateau. It was a highly centralized community. The Nok people produced lifelike representations in terracotta, including human heads and human figures, elephants, and other animals. By 500 BC they were smelting iron. By 200 AD the Nok culture had vanished. Based on stylistic similarities with the Nok terracottas, the bronze figurines of the Yoruba kingdom of Ife and those of the Bini kingdom of Benin are now believed to be continuations of the traditions of the earlier Nok culture.

Pre-colonial Africa possessed perhaps as many as 10,000 different states and polities characterized by many different sorts of political organization and rule. These included small family groups of hunter-gatherers such as the San people of southern Africa; larger, more structured groups such as the family clan groupings of the Bantu-speaking peoples of central, southern, and eastern Africa; heavily structured clan groups in the Horn of Africa; the large Sahelian kingdoms; and autonomous city-states and kingdoms such as those of the Akan; Edo, Yoruba, and Igbo people in West Africa; and the Swahili coastal trading towns of Southeast Africa.

By the ninth century AD, a string of dynastic states, including the earliest Hausa states, stretched across the sub-Saharan savannah from the western regions to central Sudan. The most powerful of these states were Ghana, Gao, and the Kanem-Bornu Empire. Ghana declined in the eleventh century, but was succeeded by the Mali Empire which consolidated much of western Sudan in the thirteenth century. Kanem accepted Islam in the eleventh century.

In the forested regions of the West African coast, independent kingdoms grew with little influence from the Muslim north. The Kingdom of Nri was established around the ninth century and was one of the first. It is also one of the oldest kingdoms in present-day Nigeria and was ruled by the Eze Nri. The Nri kingdom is famous for its elaborate bronzes, found at the town of Igbo-Ukwu. The bronzes have been dated from as far back as the ninth century.
The Kingdom of Ife, historically the first of these Yoruba city-states or kingdoms, established government under a priestly oba ('king' or 'ruler' in the Yoruba language), called the "Ooni of Ife". Ife was noted as a major religious and cultural centre in West Africa, and for its unique naturalistic tradition of bronze sculpture. The Ife model of government was adapted at the Oyo Empire, where its obas or kings, called the "Alaafins of Oyo", once controlled a large number of other Yoruba and non-Yoruba city-states and kingdoms; the Fon "Kingdom of Dahomey" was one of the non-Yoruba domains under Oyo control.

The Almoravids were a Berber dynasty from the Sahara that spread over a wide area of northwestern Africa and the Iberian peninsula during the eleventh century. The Banu Hilal and Banu Ma'qil were a collection of Arab Bedouin tribes from the Arabian Peninsula who migrated westwards via Egypt between the eleventh and thirteenth centuries. Their migration resulted in the fusion of the Arabs and Berbers, where the locals were Arabized, and Arab culture absorbed elements of the local culture, under the unifying framework of Islam.
Following the breakup of Mali, a local leader named Sonni Ali (1464–1492) founded the Songhai Empire in the region of middle Niger and the western Sudan and took control of the trans-Saharan trade. Sonni Ali seized Timbuktu in 1468 and Jenne in 1473, building his regime on trade revenues and the cooperation of Muslim merchants. His successor Askia Mohammad I (1493–1528) made Islam the official religion, built mosques, and brought to Gao Muslim scholars, including al-Maghili (d.1504), the founder of an important tradition of Sudanic African Muslim scholarship. By the eleventh century, some Hausa states – such as Kano, jigawa, Katsina, and Gobir – had developed into walled towns engaging in trade, servicing caravans, and the manufacture of goods. Until the fifteenth century, these small states were on the periphery of the major Sudanic empires of the era, paying tribute to Songhai to the west and Kanem-Borno to the east.

Slavery had long been practiced in Africa. Between the 7th and 20th centuries, the Arab slave trade (also known as "slavery in the east") took 18 million slaves from Africa via trans-Saharan and Indian Ocean routes. Between the 15th and the 19th centuries, the Atlantic slave trade took an estimated 7–12 million slaves to the New World. In addition, more than 1 million Europeans were captured by Barbary pirates and sold as slaves in North Africa between the 16th and 19th centuries.

In West Africa, the decline of the Atlantic slave trade in the 1820s caused dramatic economic shifts in local polities. The gradual decline of slave-trading, prompted by a lack of demand for slaves in the New World, increasing anti-slavery legislation in Europe and America, and the British Royal Navy's increasing presence off the West African coast, obliged African states to adopt new economies. Between 1808 and 1860, the British West Africa Squadron seized approximately 1,600 slave ships and freed 150,000 Africans who were aboard.
Action was also taken against African leaders who refused to agree to British treaties to outlaw the trade, for example against "the usurping King of Lagos", deposed in 1851. Anti-slavery treaties were signed with over 50 African rulers. The largest powers of West Africa (the Asante Confederacy, the Kingdom of Dahomey, and the Oyo Empire) adopted different ways of adapting to the shift. Asante and Dahomey concentrated on the development of "legitimate commerce" in the form of palm oil, cocoa, timber and gold, forming the bedrock of West Africa's modern export trade. The Oyo Empire, unable to adapt, collapsed into civil wars.

In the late 19th century, the European imperial powers engaged in a major territorial scramble and occupied most of the continent, creating many colonial territories, and leaving only two fully independent states: Ethiopia (known to Europeans as "Abyssinia"), and Liberia. Egypt and Sudan were never formally incorporated into any European colonial empire; however, after the British occupation of 1882, Egypt was effectively under British administration until 1922.

The Berlin Conference held in 1884–85 was an important event in the political future of African ethnic groups. It was convened by King Leopold II of Belgium, and attended by the European powers that laid claim to African territories. The Berlin Conference sought to end the European powers' Scramble for Africa, by agreeing on political division and spheres of influence. They set up the political divisions of the continent, by spheres of interest, that exist in Africa today.

Imperial rule by Europeans would continue until after the conclusion of World War II, when almost all remaining colonial territories gradually obtained formal independence. Independence movements in Africa gained momentum following World War II, which left the major European powers weakened. In 1951, Libya, a former Italian colony, gained independence. In 1956, Tunisia and Morocco won their independence from France. Ghana followed suit the next year (March 1957), becoming the first of the sub-Saharan colonies to be granted independence. Most of the rest of the continent became independent over the next decade.

Portugal's overseas presence in Sub-Saharan Africa (most notably in Angola, Cape Verde, Mozambique, Guinea-Bissau and São Tomé and Príncipe) lasted from the 16th century to 1975, after the Estado Novo regime was overthrown in a military coup in Lisbon. Rhodesia unilaterally declared independence from the United Kingdom in 1965, under the white minority government of Ian Smith, but was not internationally recognized as an independent state (as Zimbabwe) until 1980, when black nationalists gained power after a bitter guerrilla war. Although South Africa was one of the first African countries to gain independence, the state remained under the control of the country's white minority through a system of racial segregation known as apartheid until 1994.

Today, Africa contains 54 sovereign countries, most of which have borders that were drawn during the era of European colonialism. Since colonialism, African states have frequently been hampered by instability, corruption, violence, and authoritarianism. The vast majority of African states are republics that operate under some form of the presidential system of rule. However, few of them have been able to sustain democratic governments on a permanent basis, and many have instead cycled through a series of coups, producing military dictatorships.

Great instability was mainly the result of marginalization of ethnic groups, and graft under these leaders. For political gain, many leaders fanned ethnic conflicts, some of which had been exacerbated, or even created, by colonial rule. In many countries, the military was perceived as being the only group that could effectively maintain order, and it ruled many nations in Africa during the 1970s and early 1980s. During the period from the early 1960s to the late 1980s, Africa had more than 70 coups and 13 presidential assassinations. Border and territorial disputes were also common, with the European-imposed borders of many nations being widely contested through armed conflicts.

Cold War conflicts between the United States and the Soviet Union, as well as the policies of the International Monetary Fund, also played a role in instability. When a country became independent for the first time, it was often expected to align with one of the two superpowers. Many countries in Northern Africa received Soviet military aid, while others in Central and Southern Africa were supported by the United States, France or both. The 1970s saw an escalation of Cold War intrigues, as newly independent Angola and Mozambique aligned themselves with the Soviet Union, and the West and South Africa sought to contain Soviet influence by supporting friendly regimes or insurgency movements. In Rhodesia, Soviet and Chinese-backed leftist guerrillas of the Zimbabwe Patriotic Front waged a brutal guerrilla war against the country's white government. There was a major famine in Ethiopia, when hundreds of thousands of people starved. Some claimed that Marxist economic policies made the situation worse. The most devastating military conflict in modern independent Africa has been the Second Congo War; this conflict and its aftermath has killed an estimated 5.5 million people. Since 2003 there has been an ongoing conflict in Darfur which has become a humanitarian disaster. Another notable tragic event is the 1994 Rwandan genocide in which an estimated 800,000 people were murdered. AIDS in post-colonial Africa has also been a prevalent issue.

In the 21st century, however, the number of armed conflicts in Africa has steadily declined. For instance, the civil war in Angola came to an end in 2002 after nearly 30 years. This coincided with many countries abandoning communist-style command economies and opening up for market reforms. The improved stability and economic reforms have led to a great increase in foreign investment into many African nations, mainly from China, which has spurred quick economic growth in many countries, seemingly ending decades of stagnation and decline. Several African economies are among the world's fastest growing . A significant part of this growth, which is sometimes referred to as Africa Rising, can also be attributed to the facilitated diffusion of information technologies and specifically the mobile telephone. Migration from African nations has increased dramatically in the last decade.

Africa is the largest of the three great southward projections from the largest landmass of the Earth. Separated from Europe by the Mediterranean Sea, it is joined to Asia at its northeast extremity by the Isthmus of Suez (transected by the Suez Canal), wide. (Geopolitically, Egypt's Sinai Peninsula east of the Suez Canal is often considered part of Africa, as well.)

The coastline is long, and the absence of deep indentations of the shore is illustrated by the fact that Europe, which covers only – about a third of the surface of Africa – has a coastline of . From the most northerly point, Ras ben Sakka in Tunisia (37°21' N), to the most southerly point, Cape Agulhas in South Africa (34°51'15" S), is a distance of approximately . Cape Verde, 17°33'22" W, the westernmost point, is a distance of approximately to Ras Hafun, 51°27'52" E, the most easterly projection that neighbours Cape Guardafui, the tip of the Horn of Africa.

Africa's largest country is Algeria, and its smallest country is Seychelles, an archipelago off the east coast. The smallest nation on the continental mainland is The Gambia.

The African Plate is a major tectonic plate straddling the equator as well as the prime meridian. It includes much of the continent of Africa, as well as oceanic crust which lies between the continent and various surrounding ocean ridges. Between and , the Somali Plate began rifting from the African Plate along the East African Rift. Since the continent of Africa consists of crust from both the African and the Somali plates, some literature refers to the African Plate as the "Nubian Plate" to distinguish it from the continent as a whole.

Geologically, Africa includes the Arabian Peninsula; the Zagros Mountains of Iran and the Anatolian Plateau of Turkey mark where the African Plate collided with Eurasia. The Afrotropic ecozone and the Saharo-Arabian desert to its north unite the region biogeographically, and the Afro-Asiatic language family unites the north linguistically.

The climate of Africa ranges from tropical to subarctic on its highest peaks. Its northern half is primarily desert, or arid, while its central and southern areas contain both savanna plains and dense jungle (rainforest) regions. In between, there is a convergence, where vegetation patterns such as sahel and steppe dominate. Africa is the hottest continent on Earth and 60% of the entire land surface consists of drylands and deserts. The record for the highest-ever recorded temperature, in Libya in 1922 (), was discredited in 2013.

Africa boasts perhaps the world's largest combination of density and "range of freedom" of wild animal populations and diversity, with wild populations of large carnivores (such as lions, hyenas, and cheetahs) and herbivores (such as buffalo, elephants, camels, and giraffes) ranging freely on primarily open non-private plains. It is also home to a variety of "jungle" animals including snakes and primates and aquatic life such as crocodiles and amphibians. In addition, Africa has the largest number of megafauna species, as it was least affected by the extinction of the Pleistocene megafauna.

Africa has over 3,000 protected areas, with 198 marine protected areas, 50 biosphere reserves, and 80 wetlands reserves. Significant habitat destruction, increases in human population and poaching are reducing Africa's biological diversity and arable land. Human encroachment, civil unrest and the introduction of non-native species threaten biodiversity in Africa. This has been exacerbated by administrative problems, inadequate personnel and funding problems.

Deforestation is affecting Africa at twice the world rate, according to the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). According to the University of Pennsylvania African Studies Center, 31% of Africa's pasture lands and 19% of its forests and woodlands are classified as degraded, and Africa is losing over four million hectares of forest per year, which is twice the average deforestation rate for the rest of the world. Some sources claim that approximately 90% of the original, virgin forests in West Africa have been destroyed. Over 90% of Madagascar's original forests have been destroyed since the arrival of humans 2000 years ago. About 65% of Africa's agricultural land suffers from soil degradation.

The African Union (AU) is a 55-member federation consisting of all of Africa's states. The union was formed, with Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, as its headquarters, on 26 June 2001. The union was officially established on 9 July 2002 as a successor to the Organisation of African Unity (OAU). In July 2004, the African Union's Pan-African Parliament (PAP) was relocated to Midrand, in South Africa, but the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights remained in Addis Ababa. There is a policy in effect to decentralize the African Federation's institutions so that they are shared by all the states.

The African Union, not to be confused with the AU Commission, is formed by the Constitutive Act of the African Union, which aims to transform the African Economic Community, a federated commonwealth, into a state under established international conventions. The African Union has a parliamentary government, known as the African Union Government, consisting of legislative, judicial and executive organs. It is led by the African Union President and Head of State, who is also the President of the Pan-African Parliament. A person becomes AU President by being elected to the PAP, and subsequently gaining majority support in the PAP. The powers and authority of the President of the African Parliament derive from the Constitutive Act and the Protocol of the Pan-African Parliament, as well as the inheritance of presidential authority stipulated by African treaties and by international treaties, including those subordinating the Secretary General of the OAU Secretariat (AU Commission) to the PAP. The government of the AU consists of all-union (federal), regional, state, and municipal authorities, as well as hundreds of institutions, that together manage the day-to-day affairs of the institution.

Political associations such as the African Union offer hope for greater co-operation and peace between the continent's many countries. Extensive human rights abuses still occur in several parts of Africa, often under the oversight of the state. Most of such violations occur for political reasons, often as a side effect of civil war. Countries where major human rights violations have been reported in recent times include the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Sierra Leone, Liberia, Sudan, Zimbabwe, and Côte d'Ivoire.

Although it has abundant natural resources, Africa remains the world's poorest and least-developed continent, the result of a variety of causes that may include corrupt governments that have often committed serious human rights violations, failed central planning, high levels of illiteracy, lack of access to foreign capital, and frequent tribal and military conflict (ranging from guerrilla warfare to genocide). Its total nominal GDP remains behind that of the United States, China, Japan, Germany, the United Kingdom, India and France. According to the United Nations' Human Development Report in 2003, the bottom 24 ranked nations (151st to 175th) were all African.

Poverty, illiteracy, malnutrition and inadequate water supply and sanitation, as well as poor health, affect a large proportion of the people who reside in the African continent. In August 2008, the World Bank announced revised global poverty estimates based on a new international poverty line of $1.25 per day (versus the previous measure of $1.00). 81% of the Sub-Saharan Africa population was living on less than $2.50 (PPP) per day in 2005, compared with 86% for India.

Sub-Saharan Africa is the least successful region of the world in reducing poverty ($1.25 per day); some 50% of the population living in poverty in 1981 (200 million people), a figure that rose to 58% in 1996 before dropping to 50% in 2005 (380 million people). The average poor person in sub-Saharan Africa is estimated to live on only 70 cents per day, and was poorer in 2003 than in 1973, indicating increasing poverty in some areas. Some of it is attributed to unsuccessful economic liberalization programmes spearheaded by foreign companies and governments, but other studies have cited bad domestic government policies more than external factors.

Africa is now at risk of being in debt once again, particularly in Sub-Saharan African countries. The last debt crisis in 2005 was resolved with help from the heavily indebted poor countries scheme (HIPC). The HIPC resulted in some positive and negative effects on the economy in Africa. About ten years after the 2005 debt crisis in Sub-Saharan Africa was resolved, Zambia fell back into dept. A small reason was due to the fall in copper prices in 2011, but the bigger reason was that a large amount of the money Zambia borrowed was wasted or pocketed by the elite.

From 1995 to 2005, Africa's rate of economic growth increased, averaging 5% in 2005. Some countries experienced still higher growth rates, notably Angola, Sudan and Equatorial Guinea, all of which had recently begun extracting their petroleum reserves or had expanded their oil extraction capacity.

In a recently published analysis based on World Values Survey data, the Austrian political scientist Arno Tausch maintained that several African countries, most notably Ghana, perform quite well on scales of mass support for democracy and the market economy.

Tausch's global value comparison based on the World Values Survey derived the following factor analytical scales: 1. The non-violent and law-abiding society 2. Democracy movement 3. Climate of personal non-violence 4. Trust in institutions 5. Happiness, good health 6. No redistributive religious fundamentalism 7. Accepting the market 8. Feminism 9. Involvement in politics 10. Optimism and engagement 11. No welfare mentality, acceptancy of the Calvinist work ethics. The spread in the performance of African countries with complete data, Tausch concluded "is really amazing". While one should be especially hopeful about the development of future democracy and the market economy in Ghana, the article suggests pessimistic tendencies for Egypt and Algeria, and especially for Africa's leading economy, South Africa. High Human Inequality, as measured by the UNDP's Human Development Report's Index of Human Inequality, further impairs the development of Human Security. Tausch also maintains that the certain recent optimism, corresponding to economic and human rights data, emerging from Africa, is reflected in the development of a civil society.

The continent is believed to hold 90% of the world's cobalt, 90% of its platinum, 50% of its gold, 98% of its chromium, 70% of its tantalite, 64% of its manganese and one-third of its uranium. The Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC) has 70% of the world's coltan, a mineral used in the production of tantalum capacitors for electronic devices such as cell phones. The DRC also has more than 30% of the world's diamond reserves. Guinea is the world's largest exporter of bauxite. As the growth in Africa has been driven mainly by services and not manufacturing or agriculture, it has been growth without jobs and without reduction in poverty levels. In fact, the food security crisis of 2008 which took place on the heels of the global financial crisis pushed 100 million people into food insecurity.

In recent years, the People's Republic of China has built increasingly stronger ties with African nations and is Africa's largest trading partner. In 2007, Chinese companies invested a total of US$1 billion in Africa.

A Harvard University study led by professor Calestous Juma showed that Africa could feed itself by making the transition from importer to self-sufficiency. "African agriculture is at the crossroads; we have come to the end of a century of policies that favoured Africa's export of raw materials and importation of food. Africa is starting to focus on agricultural innovation as its new engine for regional trade and prosperity."

During US President Barack Obama's visit to Africa in July 2013, he announced a US$7 billion plan to further develop infrastructure and work more intensively with African heads of state. He also announced a new programme named Trade Africa, designed to boost trade within the continent as well as between Africa and the US.

Africa's population has rapidly increased over the last 40 years, and consequently, it is relatively young. In some African states, more than half the population is under 25 years of age. The total number of people in Africa increased from 229 million in 1950 to 630 million in 1990. As of , the population of Africa is estimated at / 1e9 round 1 billion . Africa's total population surpassing other continents is fairly recent; African population surpassed Europe in the 1990s, while the Americas was overtaken sometime around the year 2000; Africa's rapid population growth is expected to overtake the only two nations currently larger than its population, at roughly the same time – India and China's 1.4 billion people each will swap ranking around the year 2022. This increase in number of babies born in Africa compared to the rest of the world is expected to reach approximately 37% in the year 2050, an increase of 21% since 1990 alone.

Speakers of Bantu languages (part of the Niger–Congo family) are the majority in southern, central and southeast Africa. The Bantu-speaking peoples from the Sahel progressively expanded over most of Sub-Saharan Africa. But there are also several Nilotic groups in South Sudan and East Africa, the mixed Swahili people on the Swahili Coast, and a few remaining indigenous Khoisan ("San" or "Bushmen") and Pygmy peoples in southern and central Africa, respectively. Bantu-speaking Africans also predominate in Gabon and Equatorial Guinea, and are found in parts of southern Cameroon. In the Kalahari Desert of Southern Africa, the distinct people known as the Bushmen (also "San", closely related to, but distinct from "Hottentots") have long been present. The San are physically distinct from other Africans and are the indigenous people of southern Africa. Pygmies are the pre-Bantu indigenous peoples of central Africa.

The peoples of West Africa primarily speak Niger–Congo languages, belonging mostly to its non-Bantu branches, though some Nilo-Saharan and Afro-Asiatic speaking groups are also found. The Niger–Congo-speaking Yoruba, Igbo, Fulani, Akan and Wolof ethnic groups are the largest and most influential. In the central Sahara, Mandinka or Mande groups are most significant. Chadic-speaking groups, including the Hausa, are found in more northerly parts of the region nearest to the Sahara, and Nilo-Saharan communities, such as the Songhai, Kanuri and Zarma, are found in the eastern parts of West Africa bordering Central Africa.

The peoples of North Africa consist of three main indigenous groups: Berbers in the northwest, Egyptians in the northeast, and Nilo-Saharan-speaking peoples in the east. The Arabs who arrived in the 7th century AD introduced the Arabic language and Islam to North Africa. The Semitic Phoenicians (who founded Carthage) and Hyksos, the Indo-Iranian Alans, the Indo- European Greeks, Romans, and Vandals settled in North Africa as well. Significant Berber communities remain within Morocco and Algeria in the 21st century, while, to a lesser extent, Berber speakers are also present in some regions of Tunisia and Libya. The Berber-speaking Tuareg and other often-nomadic peoples are the principal inhabitants of the Saharan interior of North Africa. In Mauritania, there is a small but near-extinct Berber community in the north and Niger–Congo-speaking peoples in the south, though in both regions Arabic and Arab culture predominates. In Sudan, although Arabic and Arab culture predominate, it is mostly inhabited by groups that originally spoke Nilo-Saharan, such as the Nubians, Fur, Masalit and Zaghawa, who, over the centuries, have variously intermixed with migrants from the Arabian peninsula. Small communities of Afro-Asiatic-speaking Beja nomads can also be found in Egypt and Sudan.
In the Horn of Africa, some Ethiopian and Eritrean groups (like the Amhara and Tigrayans, collectively known as Habesha) speak languages from the Semitic branch of the Afro-Asiatic language family, while the Oromo and Somali speak languages from the Cushitic branch of Afro-Asiatic.

Prior to the decolonization movements of the post-World War II era, Europeans were represented in every part of Africa. Decolonization during the 1960s and 1970s often resulted in the mass emigration of white settlers – especially from Algeria and Morocco (1.6 million "pieds-noirs" in North Africa), Kenya, Congo, Rhodesia, Mozambique and Angola. Between 1975 and 1977, over a million colonials returned to Portugal alone. Nevertheless, white Africans remain an important minority in many African states, particularly Zimbabwe, Namibia, Réunion, and the Republic of South Africa. The country with the largest white African population is South Africa. Dutch and British diasporas represent the largest communities of European ancestry on the continent today.

European colonization also brought sizable groups of Asians, particularly from the Indian subcontinent, to British colonies. Large Indian communities are found in South Africa, and smaller ones are present in Kenya, Tanzania, and some other southern and southeast African countries. The large Indian community in Uganda was expelled by the dictator Idi Amin in 1972, though many have since returned. The islands in the Indian Ocean are also populated primarily by people of Asian origin, often mixed with Africans and Europeans. The Malagasy people of Madagascar are an Austronesian people, but those along the coast are generally mixed with Bantu, Arab, Indian and European origins. Malay and Indian ancestries are also important components in the group of people known in South Africa as Cape Coloureds (people with origins in two or more races and continents). During the 20th century, small but economically important communities of Lebanese and Chinese have also developed in the larger coastal cities of West and East Africa, respectively.

By most estimates, well over a thousand languages (UNESCO has estimated around two thousand) are spoken in Africa. Most are of African origin, though some are of European or Asian origin. Africa is the most multilingual continent in the world, and it is not rare for individuals to fluently speak not only multiple African languages, but one or more European ones as well. There are four major language families indigenous to Africa:

Following the end of colonialism, nearly all African countries adopted official languages that originated outside the continent, although several countries also granted legal recognition to indigenous languages (such as Swahili, Yoruba, Igbo and Hausa). In numerous countries, English and French ("see African French") are used for communication in the public sphere such as government, commerce, education and the media. Arabic, Portuguese, Afrikaans and Spanish are examples of languages that trace their origin to outside of Africa, and that are used by millions of Africans today, both in the public and private spheres. Italian is spoken by some in former Italian colonies in Africa. German is spoken in Namibia, as it was a former German protectorate.

Some aspects of traditional African cultures have become less practised in recent years as a result of neglect and suppression by colonial and post-colonial regimes. For example, African customs were discouraged, and African languages were prohibited in mission schools. Leopold II of Belgium attempted to "civilize" Africans by discouraging polygamy and witchcraft.

Obidoh Freeborn posits that colonialism is one element that has created the character of modern African art. According to authors Douglas Fraser and Herbert M. Cole, "The precipitous alterations in the power structure wrought by colonialism were quickly followed by drastic iconographic changes in the art." Fraser and Cole assert that, in Igboland, some art objects "lack the vigor and careful craftsmanship of the earlier art objects that served traditional functions. Author Chika Okeke-Agulu states that "the racist infrastructure of British imperial enterprise forced upon the political and cultural guardians of empire a denial and suppression of an emergent sovereign Africa and modernist art." Editors F. Abiola Irele and Simon Gikandi comment that the current identity of African literature had its genesis in the "traumatic encounter between Africa and Europe." On the other hand, Mhoze Chikowero believes that Africans deployed music, dance, spirituality, and other performative cultures to (re)asset themselves as active agents and indigenous intellectuals, to unmake their colonial marginalization and reshape their own destinies." 

There is now a resurgence in the attempts to rediscover and revalue African traditional cultures, under such movements as the African Renaissance, led by Thabo Mbeki, Afrocentrism, led by a group of scholars, including Molefi Asante, as well as the increasing recognition of traditional spiritualism through decriminalization of Vodou and other forms of spirituality.

African art and architecture reflect the diversity of African cultures. The region's oldest known beads were made from "Nassarius" shells and worn as personal ornaments 72,000 years ago. The Great Pyramid of Giza in Egypt was the world's tallest structure for 4,000 years, until the completion of Lincoln Cathedral around the year 1300. The stone ruins of Great Zimbabwe are also noteworthy for their architecture, as are the monolithic churches at Lalibela, Ethiopia, such as the Church of Saint George.

Egypt has long been a cultural focus of the Arab world, while remembrance of the rhythms of sub-Saharan Africa, in particular West Africa, was transmitted through the Atlantic slave trade to modern samba, blues, jazz, reggae, hip hop, and rock. The 1950s through the 1970s saw a conglomeration of these various styles with the popularization of Afrobeat and Highlife music. Modern music of the continent includes the highly complex choral singing of southern Africa and the dance rhythms of the musical genre of soukous, dominated by the music of the Democratic Republic of Congo. Indigenous musical and dance traditions of Africa are maintained by oral traditions, and they are distinct from the music and dance styles of North Africa and Southern Africa. Arab influences are visible in North African music and dance and, in Southern Africa, Western influences are apparent due to colonization.

Fifty-four African countries have football (soccer) teams in the Confederation of African Football. Egypt has won the African Cup seven times, and a record-making three times in a row. Cameroon, Nigeria, Senegal, Ghana, and Algeria have advanced to the knockout stage of recent FIFA World Cups. South Africa hosted the 2010 World Cup tournament, becoming the first African country to do so.

Cricket is popular in some African nations. South Africa and Zimbabwe have Test status, while Kenya is the leading non-test team and previously had One-Day International cricket (ODI) status (from 10 October 1997, until 30 January 2014). The three countries jointly hosted the 2003 Cricket World Cup. Namibia is the other African country to have played in a World Cup. Morocco in northern Africa has also hosted the 2002 Morocco Cup, but the national team has never qualified for a major tournament. Rugby is a popular sport in South Africa, Namibia, and Zimbabwe.

Africans profess a wide variety of religious beliefs, and statistics on religious affiliation are difficult to come by since they are often a sensitive topic for governments with mixed religious populations. According to the World Book Encyclopedia, Islam and Christianity are the two largest religions in Africa.According to Encyclopædia Britannica, 45% of the population are Christians, 40% are Muslims, and 10% follow traditional religions. A small number of Africans are Hindu, Buddhist, Confucianist, Baha'i, or Jewish. There is also a minority of people in Africa who are irreligious.

The countries in this table are categorized according to the scheme for geographic subregions used by the United Nations, and data included are per sources in cross-referenced articles. Where they differ, provisos are clearly indicated.


</doc>
<doc id="16584849" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=16584849" title="Outline of Africa">
Outline of Africa

The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to the continent Africa:

Africa is the world's second largest and second most populous continent, after Asia. It is famous for its savanna, its jungles, and the Sahara (desert).


Regions of Africa



List of African countries


Demographics of Africa


00.0



African empires

Culture of Africa



African cuisine


Ethnic groups in Africa


Religion in Africa



Economy of Africa

Communications in Africa


Education in Africa

Politics of Africa


Law of Africa

Africa







</doc>
<doc id="63527222" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=63527222" title="Chinese Friendship Farms in Africa">
Chinese Friendship Farms in Africa

Chinese Friendship Farms are part of the agricultural cooperation of the People's Republic of China with many African states. Some of the numerous projects started as development aid, other (and later) engagements lost this aspect. 
"China’s 'Friendship Farms' in various African countries are formally owned by a Chinese parastatal organisation, but are mostly medium scale, usually below 1000 hectares." 
While the intended and more often cited farm sizes are reported in the thousands, actual sizes are much smaller or the engagement never became operational.
In the context of large-scale land acquisitions they are, therefore, among smaller engagements.

Many of the plantations indeed carry the name "Friendship Farm". In projects oriented towards production this implies a "political requests by the host government".
Farmers on both sides consider the activities as a political task as well, where they equate political with building friendships. In the context of Mozambique this means to concentrate on crops that improve local food security.
This, however, does not exclude an economic and profit-maximizing interest. In Mozambique a project initialized as an aid project is now open to invest in cash crops such as soybeans, rapeseed, tobacco for the Chinese market or organic vegetables for the Europe.

Official Chinese government information from 2006 claims that through agricultural cooperation between China and Africa 40 countries could establish "agro technology pilot or demonstration farms and promotion stations under nearly 200 cooperation programs and carried out 23 fishery cooperation projects with 13 African countries." Exchange of technical staff is also an important part of the cooperation (more than 10 000 Chinese specialists sent to Africa).
Academic findings from 2009, claim that 14 such agro-technical demonstration stations had been started by China.
The employment mix between Chinese and local African workers varies between projects, yet many projects have a significant positive employment effect in their regions.
Chinese agricultural investment has to be analysed in the global context. It has received (mostly unfairly) exceptional international media coverage. 
The list of projects is long, yet here are a few illustrative examples

A comprehensive list of investments can be found in the book 'Will Africa feed China?'



</doc>
<doc id="27776693" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=27776693" title="Toxic bird">
Toxic bird

Toxic birds are birds that use toxins to defend themselves from predators. No species of bird is known to actively inject or even produce venom, but some birds are known to be poisonous to touch or eat. These birds usually sequester poisons from animals and plants that they feed on, commonly from poisonous insects.

The pitohui, the ifrita, and the rufous or little shrikethrush sequester batrachotoxin in their skin and feathers. The African spur-winged goose is toxic to eat as it sequesters poison in its tissues, from the blister beetles that it feeds on. Common quail are also known to be toxic and able to cause coturnism at certain stages in their migrations.



</doc>
<doc id="2540429" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=2540429" title="List of terms used in bird topography">
List of terms used in bird topography

The following is a list of terms used in bird topography:





</doc>
<doc id="25083905" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=25083905" title="Chorioallantoic membrane">
Chorioallantoic membrane

The chorioallantoic membrane — also called the chorioallantois or abbreviated to CAM — is a vascular membrane found in eggs of some amniotes, such as birds and reptiles. It is formed by the fusion of the mesodermal layers of two developmental structures: the allantois and the chorion. In mammals, this structure forms the placenta.

Three different layers compose the chorioallantoic membrane; these are called the chorionic epithelium, the mesenchyme and the allantoic epithelium. Blood capillaries and sinuses are found between epithelial cells of the chorionic layer, allowing close contact (within 0.2 μm) with air found in pores of the shell membrane of the egg. As a result, the chorioallantoic membrane allows exchange of gases, such as oxygen, to developing embryos. During embryonic development of birds, the chorioallantoic membrane also plays an essential role in bone formation by transporting calcium into the embryo from the eggshell.

Chorioallantoic membranes from developing chicken eggs are routinely used in biological and biomedical research to investigate development, angiogenesis, tumors, chemotherapeutic agents, and to propagate and investigate viruses or helminths.


</doc>
<doc id="3474432" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3474432" title="Clutch (eggs)">
Clutch (eggs)

A clutch of eggs is the group of eggs produced by birds, amphibians, or reptiles, often at a single time, particularly those laid in a nest.

In birds, destruction of a clutch by predators (or removal by humans, for example the California condor breeding program) results in "double-clutching". The technique is used to double the production of a species' eggs, in the California condor case, specifically to increase population size. The act of putting one's hand in a nest to remove eggs is known as "dipping the clutch".

Clutch size differs greatly between species, sometimes even within the same genus. It may also differ within the same species due to many factors including habitat, health, nutrition, predation pressures, and time of year. Clutch size variation can also reflect variation in optimal reproduction effort. In birds, clutch size can vary within a species due to various features (age and health of laying female, ability of male to supply food, and abundance of prey), while some species are determinant layers, laying a species-specific number of eggs. Long-lived species tend to have smaller clutch sizes than short-lived species (see also r/K selection theory). The evolution of optimal clutch size is also driven by other factors, such as parent–offspring conflict.

In birds, ornithologist David Lack carried out much research into regulation of clutch size. In species with altricial young, he proposed that optimal clutch size was determined by the number of young a parent could feed until fledgling. In precocial birds, Lack determined that clutch size was determined by the nutrients available to egg-laying females. An experimental study in Black Brent Geese (Black Brant), which rarely lay more than 5 eggs, found that the probability of an egg successfully leading to a fledged gosling declined from 0.81 for two-egg clutches to 0.50 for seven-egg clutches, whilst the nesting period increased with the increasing number of eggs laid. This suggests that there is no benefit for female Black Brant to lay more than five eggs. 



</doc>
<doc id="8813046" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8813046" title="Crèche (zoology)">
Crèche (zoology)

The crèche (from French) in zoology refers to care of another's offspring, for instance in a colony. This term is generally used in the study of bird colonies. Many penguins form crèches, in addition to many other birds such as the Canada goose, common eider and common shelduck.

Among reptiles, spectacled caiman also raise their young in crèches, one female taking care of her own as well as several others' offspring.

Lions are another notable species to form crèches. Females within a pride will provide mutual protection and will even nurse each other's cubs. However, studies have shown that cubs raised in crèches tend to have lower feeding-rates than if they were raised by one mother. This indicates that in lions, the crèche is a defensive formation.



</doc>
<doc id="9986783" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=9986783" title="Fecal sac">
Fecal sac

A fecal sac (also spelled faecal sac) is a mucous membrane, generally white or clear with a dark end, that surrounds the feces of some species of nestling birds. It allows parent birds to more easily remove fecal material from the nest. The nestling usually produces a fecal sac within seconds of being fed; if not, a waiting adult may prod around the youngster's cloaca to stimulate excretion. Young birds of some species adopt specific postures or engage in specific behaviors to signal that they are producing fecal sacs. For example, nestling curve-billed thrashers raise their posteriors in the air, while young cactus wrens shake their bodies. Other species deposit the sacs on the rim of the nest, where they are likely to be seen (and removed) by parent birds.

Not all species generate fecal sacs. They are most prevalent in passerines and their near relatives, which have young that remain in the nest for longer periods. In some species, the fecal sacs of small nestlings are eaten by their parents. In other species, and when nestlings are older, sacs are typically taken some distance from the nest and discarded. Young birds generally stop producing fecal sacs shortly before they fledge.

Removal of fecal material helps to improve nest sanitation, which in turn helps to increase the likelihood that nestlings will remain healthy. It also helps to reduce the chance that predators will see it or smell it and thereby find the nest. There is evidence that parent birds of some species gain a nutritional benefit from eating the fecal sacs; studies have shown that females — which tend to be more nutritionally stressed than their mates — are far more likely to consume sacs than are males. Even brood parasites such as brown-headed cowbirds, which do not care for their own offspring, have been documented swallowing the fecal sacs of nestlings of their host species.

Scientists can use fecal sacs to learn a number of things about individual birds. Examination of the contents of the sac can reveal details of the nestling's diet, and can indicate what contaminants the young bird has been exposed to. The presence of an adult bird carrying a fecal sac is used in bird censuses as an indication of breeding.


</doc>
<doc id="11253941" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11253941" title="Flight feather">
Flight feather

Flight feathers ("Pennae volatus") are the long, stiff, asymmetrically shaped, but symmetrically paired pennaceous feathers on the wings or tail of a bird; those on the wings are called remiges (), singular remex (), while those on the tail are called rectrices (), singular rectrix (). The primary function of the flight feathers is to aid in the generation of both thrust and lift, thereby enabling flight. The flight feathers of some birds have evolved to perform additional functions, generally associated with territorial displays, courtship rituals or feeding methods. In some species, these feathers have developed into long showy plumes used in visual courtship displays, while in others they create a sound during display flights. Tiny serrations on the leading edge of their remiges help owls to fly silently (and therefore hunt more successfully), while the extra-stiff rectrices of woodpeckers help them to brace against tree trunks as they hammer on them. Even flightless birds still retain flight feathers, though sometimes in radically modified forms.

The moult of their flight feathers can cause serious problems for birds, as it can impair their ability to fly. Different species have evolved different strategies for coping with this, ranging from dropping all their flight feathers at once (and thus becoming flightless for some relatively short period of time) to extending the moult over a period of several years.

Remiges (from the Latin for "oarsman") are located on the posterior side of the wing. Ligaments attach the long "calami" (quills) firmly to the wing bones, and a thick, strong band of tendinous tissue known as the "postpatagium" helps to hold and support the remiges in place. Corresponding remiges on individual birds are symmetrical between the two wings, matching to a large extent in size and shape (except in the case of mutation or damage), though not necessarily in pattern. They are given different names depending on their position along the wing.

Primaries are connected to the manus (the bird's "hand", composed of carpometacarpus and phalanges); these are the longest and narrowest of the remiges (particularly those attached to the phalanges), and they can be individually rotated. These feathers are especially important for flapping flight, as they are the principal source of thrust, moving the bird forward through the air. The mechanical properties of primaries are important in supporting flight. Most thrust is generated on the downstroke of flapping flight. However, on the upstroke (when the bird often draws its wing in close to its body), the primaries are separated and rotated, reducing air resistance while still helping to provide some thrust. The flexibility of the remiges on the wingtips of large soaring birds also allows for the spreading of those feathers, which helps to reduce the creation of wingtip vortices, thereby reducing drag. The barbules on these feathers, friction barbules, are specialized with large lobular barbicels that help grip and prevent slippage of overlying feathers and are present in most of the flying birds.
Species vary somewhat in the number of primaries they possess. The number in non-passerines generally varies between 9 and 11, but grebes, storks and flamingos have 12, and ostriches have 16. While most modern passerines have ten primaries, some have only nine. Those with nine are missing the most distal primary (sometimes called the remicle) which is typically very small and sometimes rudimentary in passerines.

The outermost primaries—those connected to the phalanges—are sometimes known as pinions.

Secondaries are connected to the ulna. In some species, the ligaments that bind these remiges to the bone connect to small, rounded projections, known as quill knobs, on the ulna; in other species, no such knobs exist. Secondary feathers remain close together in flight (they cannot be individually separated like the primaries can) and help to provide lift by creating the airfoil shape of the bird's wing. Secondaries tend to be shorter and broader than primaries, with blunter ends (see illustration). They vary in number from 6 in hummingbirds to as many as 40 in some species of albatross. In general, larger and longer-winged species have a larger number of secondaries.
Birds in more than 40 non-passerine families seem to be missing the fifth secondary feather on each wing, a state known as diastataxis (those that do have the fifth secondary are said to eutaxic). In these birds, the fifth set of secondary covert feathers does not cover any remiges, possibly due to a twisting of the feather papillae during embryonic development. Loons, grebes, pelicans, hawks and eagles, cranes, sandpipers, gulls, parrots, and owls are among the families missing this feather.

Tertials arise in the brachial region and are not considered true remiges as they are not supported by attachment to the corresponding bone, in this case the humerus. These elongated "true" tertials act as a protective cover for all or part of the folded primaries and secondaries, and do not qualify as flight feathers as such. However, many authorities use the term tertials to refer to the shorter, more symmetrical innermost secondaries of passerines (arising from the olecranon and performing the same function as true tertials) in an effort to distinguish them from other secondaries. The term humeral is sometimes used for birds such as the albatrosses and pelicans that have a long humerus.

The calami of the flight feathers are protected by a layer of non-flight feathers called "covert" feathers or "tectrices" (singular "tectrix"), at least one layer of them both above and beneath the flight feathers of the wings as well as above and below the rectrices of the tail. These feathers may vary widely in size — in fact, the upper tail tectrices of the male peafowl, rather than its rectrices, are what constitute its elaborate and colorful "train".

The outermost primaries of large soaring birds, particularly raptors, often show a pronounced narrowing at some variable distance along the feather edges. These narrowings are called either notches or emarginations depending on the degree of their slope. An emargination is a gradual change, and can be found on either side of the feather. A notch is an abrupt change, and is only found on the wider trailing edge of the remex. (Both are visible on the primary in the photo showing the feathers; they can be found about halfway along both sides of the left hand feather—a shallow notch on the left, and a gradual emargination on the right.) The presence of notches and emarginations creates gaps at the wingtip; air is forced through these gaps, increasing the generation of lift.

Feathers on the alula or bastard wing are not generally considered to be flight feathers in the strict sense; though they are asymmetrical, they lack the length and stiffness of most true flight feathers. However, alula feathers are definitely an aid to slow flight. These feathers—which are attached to the bird's "thumb" and normally lie flush against the anterior edge of the wing—function in the same way as the slats on an airplane wing, allowing the wing to achieve a higher than normal angle of attack – and thus lift – without resulting in a stall. By manipulating its thumb to create a gap between the alula and the rest of the wing, a bird can avoid stalling when flying at low speeds or landing.

The development of the remiges (and alulae) of nestling hoatzins is much delayed compared to the development of these feathers in other young birds, presumably because young hoatzins are equipped with claws on their first two digits. They use these small rounded hooks to grasp branches when clambering about in trees, and feathering on these digits would presumably interfere with that functionality. Most youngsters shed their claws sometime between their 70th and 100th day of life, but some retain them— though callused-over and unusable— into adulthood.

Rectrices (singular rectrix) from the Latin word for "helmsman", help the bird to brake and steer in flight. These feathers lie in a single horizontal row on the rear margin of the anatomic tail. Only the central pair are attached (via ligaments) to the tail bones; the remaining rectrices are embedded into the rectricial bulbs, complex structures of fat and muscle that surround those bones. Rectrices are always paired, with a vast majority of species having six pairs. They are absent in grebes and some ratites, and greatly reduced in size in penguins. Many grouse species have more than 12 rectrices. In some species (including ruffed grouse, hazel grouse and common snipe), the number varies among individuals. Domestic pigeons have a highly variable number as a result of changes brought about over centuries of selective breeding.

In order to make the discussion of such topics as moult processes or body structure easier, ornithologists assign a number to each flight feather. By convention, the numbers assigned to primary feathers always start with the letter P "(P1, P2, P3, etc.)", those of secondaries with the letter S, those of tertials with T and those of rectrices with R.

Most authorities number the primaries descendantly, starting from the innermost primary (the one closest to the secondaries) and working outwards; others number them ascendantly, from the most distal primary inwards. There are some advantages to each method. Descendant numbering follows the normal sequence of most birds' primary moult. In the event that a species is missing the small distal 10th primary, as some passerines are, its lack does not impact the numbering of the remaining primaries. Ascendant numbering, on the other hand, allows for uniformity in the numbering of non-passerine primaries, as they almost invariably have four attached to the manus regardless of how many primaries they have overall. This method is particularly useful for indicating wing formulae, as the outermost primary is the one with which the measurements begin.

Secondaries are always numbered ascendantly, starting with the outermost secondary (the one closest to the primaries) and working inwards. Tertials are also numbered ascendantly, but in this case, the numbers continue on consecutively from that given to the last secondary (e.g. ... S5, S6, T7, T8, ... etc.).

Rectrices are always numbered from the centermost pair outwards in both directions.

The flight feathers of some species have undergone evolutionary changes which allow them to provide additional functionality.

In some species, for example, either remiges or rectrices make a sound during flight. These sounds are most often associated with courtship or territorial displays. The outer primaries of male broad-tailed hummingbirds produce a distinctive high-pitched trill, both in direct flight and in power-dives during courtship displays; this trill is diminished when the outer primaries are worn, and absent when those feathers have been moulted. During the northern lapwing's zigzagging display flight, the bird's outer primaries produce a humming sound. The outer primaries of the male American woodcock are shorter and slightly narrower than those of the female, and are likely the source of the whistling and twittering sounds made during his courtship display flights. Male club-winged manakins use modified secondaries to make a clear trilling courtship call. A curve-tipped secondary on each wing is dragged against an adjacent ridged secondary at high speeds (as many as 110 times per second—slightly faster than a hummingbird's wingbeat) to create a stridulation much like that produced by some insects. Both Wilson's and common snipe have modified outer tail feathers which make noise when they are spread during the birds' roller coaster display flights; as the bird dives, wind flows through the modified feathers and creates a series of rising and falling notes, which is known as "winnowing". Differences between the sounds produced by these two former conspecific subspecies—and the fact that the outer two pairs of rectrices in Wilson's snipe are modified, while only the single outermost pair are modified in common snipe—were among the characteristics used to justify their splitting into two distinct and separate species.
Flight feathers are also used by some species in visual displays. Male standard-winged and pennant-winged nightjars have modified P2 primaries (using the descendant numbering scheme explained above) which are displayed during their courtship rituals. In the standard-winged nightjar, this modified primary consists of an extremely long shaft with a small "pennant" (actually a large web of barbules) at the tip. In the pennant-winged nightjar, the P2 primary is an extremely long (but otherwise normal) feather, while P3, P4 and P5 are successively shorter; the overall effect is a broadly forked wingtip with a very long plume beyond the lower half of the fork.

Males of many species, ranging from the widely introduced ring-necked pheasant to Africa's many whydahs, have one or more elongated pairs of rectrices, which play an often-critical role in their courtship rituals. The outermost pair of rectrices in male lyrebirds are extremely long and strongly curved at the ends. These plumes are raised up over the bird's head (along with a fine spray of modified uppertail coverts) during his extraordinary display. Rectrix modification reaches its pinnacle among the birds of paradise, which display an assortment of often bizarrely modified feathers, ranging from the extremely long plumes of the ribbon-tailed astrapia (nearly three times the length of the bird itself) to the dramatically coiled twin plumes of the magnificent bird-of-paradise.

Owls have remiges which are serrated rather than smooth on the leading edge. This adaptation disrupts the flow of air over the wings, eliminating the noise that airflow over a smooth surface normally creates, and allowing the birds to fly and hunt silently.

The rectrices of woodpeckers are proportionately short and very stiff, allowing them to better brace themselves against tree trunks while feeding. This adaptation is also found, though to a lesser extent, in some other species that feed along tree trunks, including woodcreepers and treecreepers.

Scientists have not yet determined the function of all flight feather modifications. Male swallows in the genera "Psalidoprocne" and "Stelgidopteryx" have tiny recurved hooks on the leading edges of their outer primaries, but the function of these hooks is not yet known; some authorities suggest they may produce a sound during territorial or courtship displays.

Over time, a small number of bird species have lost their ability to fly. Some of these, such as the steamer ducks, show no appreciable changes in their flight feathers. Some, such as the Titicaca grebe and a number of the flightless rails, have a reduced number of primaries.

The remiges of ratites are soft and downy; they lack the interlocking hooks and barbules that help to stiffen the flight feathers of other birds. In addition, the emu's remiges are proportionately much reduced in size, while those of the cassowaries are reduced both in number and structure, consisting merely of 5–6 bare quills. Most ratites have completely lost their rectrices; only the ostrich still has them.

Penguins have lost their differentiated flight feathers. As adults, their wings and tail are covered with the same small, stiff, slightly curved feathers as are found on the rest of their bodies.

The ground-dwelling kakapo, which is the world's only flightless parrot, has remiges which are shorter, rounder and more symmetrically vaned than those of parrots capable of flight; these flight feathers also contain fewer interlocking barbules near their tips.

Once they have finished growing, feathers are essentially dead structures. Over time, they become worn and abraded, and need to be replaced. This replacement process is known as moult (molt in the United States). The loss of wing and tail feathers can affect a bird's ability to fly (sometimes dramatically) and in certain families can impair the ability to feed or perform courtship displays. The timing and progression of flight feather moult therefore varies among families.

For most birds, moult begins at a certain specific point, called a focus (plural foci), on the wing or tail and proceeds in a sequential manner in one or both directions from there. For example, most passerines have a focus between the innermost primary (P1, using the numbering scheme explained above) and outermost secondary (S1), and a focus point in the middle of the center pair of rectrices. As passerine moult begins, the two feathers closest to the focus are the first to drop. When replacement feathers reach roughly half of their eventual length, the next feathers in line (P2 and S2 on the wing, and both R2s on the tail) are dropped. This pattern of drop and replacement continues until moult reaches either end of the wing or tail. The speed of the moult can vary somewhat within a species. Some passerines that breed in the Arctic, for example, drop many more flight feathers at once (sometimes becoming briefly flightless) in order to complete their entire wing moult prior to migrating south, while those same species breeding at lower latitudes undergo a more protracted moult.

In many species, there is more than one focus along the wing. Here, moult begins at all foci simultaneously, but generally proceeds only in one direction. Most grouse, for example, have two wing foci: one at the wingtip, the other between feathers P1 and S1. In this case, moult proceeds descendantly from both foci. Many large, long-winged birds have multiple wing foci.

Birds that are heavily "wing-loaded"—that is, heavy-bodied birds with relatively short wings—have great difficulty flying with the loss of even a few flight feathers. A protracted moult like the one described above would leave them vulnerable to predators for a sizeable portion of the year. Instead, these birds lose all their flight feathers at once. This leaves them completely flightless for a period of three to four weeks, but means their overall period of vulnerability is significantly shorter than it would otherwise be. Eleven families of birds, including loons, grebes and most waterfowl, have this moult strategy.

The cuckoos show what is called saltatory or transilient wing moults. In simple forms, this involves the moulting and replacement of odd-numbered primaries and then the even-numbered primaries. There are however complex variations with differences based on life history.

Arboreal woodpeckers, which depend on their tails—particularly the strong central pair of rectrices—for support while they feed, have a unique tail moult. Rather than moulting their central tail feathers first, as most birds do, they retain these feathers until last. Instead, the second pair of rectrices (both R2 feathers) are the first to drop. (In some species in the genera "Celeus" and "Dendropicos", the third pair is the first dropped.) The pattern of feather drop and replacement proceeds as described for passerines (above) until all other rectrices have been replaced; only then are the central tail rectrices moulted. This provides some protection to the growing feathers, since they're always covered by at least one existing feather, and also ensures that the bird's newly strengthened tail is best able to cope with the loss of the crucial central rectrices. Ground-feeding woodpeckers, such as the wrynecks, do not have this modified moult strategy; in fact, wrynecks moult their outer tail feathers first, with moult proceeding proximally from there.

There are often substantial differences between the remiges and rectrices of adults and juveniles of the same species. Because all juvenile feathers are grown at once—a tremendous energy burden to the developing bird—they are softer and of poorer quality than the equivalent feathers of adults, which are moulted over a longer period of time (as long as several years in some cases). As a result, they wear more quickly.

As feathers grow at variable rates, these variations lead to visible dark and light bands in the fully formed feather. These "growth bars" and their widths have been used to determine the daily nutritional status of birds. Each light and dark bar correspond to around 24 hours and the use of this technique has been called "ptilochronology" (analogous to dendrochronology).

In general, juveniles have feathers which are narrower and more sharply pointed at the tip. This can be particularly visible when the bird is in flight, especially in the case of raptors. The trailing edge of the wing of a juvenile bird can appear almost serrated, due to the feathers' sharp tips, while that of an older bird will be straighter-edged. The flight feathers of a juvenile bird will also be uniform in length, since they all grew at the same time. Those of adults will be of various lengths and levels of wear, since each is moulted at a different time.

The flight feathers of adults and juveniles can differ considerably in length, particularly among the raptors. Juveniles tend to have slightly longer rectrices and shorter, broader wings (with shorter outer primaries, and longer inner primaries and secondaries) than do adults of the same species. However, there are many exceptions. In longer-tailed species, such as swallow-tailed kite, secretary bird and European honey buzzard, for example, juveniles have shorter rectrices than adults do. Juveniles of some "Buteo" buzzards have narrower wings than adults do, while those of large juvenile falcons are longer. It is theorized that the differences help young birds compensate for their inexperience, weaker flight muscles and poorer flying ability.

A wing formula describes the shape of distal end of a bird's wing in a mathematical way. It can be used to help distinguish between species with similar plumages, and thus is particularly useful for those who ring (band) birds.

To determine a bird's wing formula, the distance between the tip of the most distal primary and the tip of its greater covert (the longest of the feathers that cover and protect the shaft of that primary) is measured in millimeters. In some cases, this results in a positive number (e.g., the primary extends beyond its greater covert), while in other cases it is a negative number (e.g. the primary is completely covered by the greater covert, as happens in some passerine species). Next, the longest primary feather is identified, and the differences between the length of that primary and that of all remaining primaries and of the longest secondary are also measured, again in millimeters. If any primary shows a notch or emargination, this is noted, and the distance between the feather's tip and any notch is measured, as is the depth of the notch. All distance measurements are made with the bird's wing closed, so as to maintain the relative positions of the feathers.

While there can be considerable variation across members of a species—and while the results are obviously impacted by the effects of moult and feather regeneration—even very closely related species show clear differences in their wing formulas.

The distance that a bird's longest primaries extend beyond its longest secondaries (or tertials) when its wings are folded is referred to as the primary extension or primary projection. As with wing formulae, this measurement is useful for distinguishing between similarly plumaged birds; however, unlike wing formulae, it is not necessary to have the bird in-hand to make the measurement. Rather, this is a useful "relative" measurement—some species have long primary extensions, while others have shorter ones. Among the "Empidonax" flycatchers of the Americas, for example, the dusky flycatcher has a much shorter primary extension than does the very similarly plumaged Hammond's flycatcher. Europe's common skylark has a long primary projection, while that of the near-lookalike Oriental skylark is very short.

As a general rule, species which are long distance migrants will have longer primary projection than similar species which do not migrate or migrate shorter distances.





</doc>
<doc id="8809081" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8809081" title="Flock (birds)">
Flock (birds)

A flock is a gathering of a group of same species animals in order to forage or travel with one another. In avians flocks are typically seen in association with migration. While this is true it can also be seen that flocking is important in safety from predation and foraging benefits. However it is also important to note that living in a flock can also come at a cost to the birds living within it.

The definition of flock is narrow, only focusing on a single species existing within a flock. However the existence of mixed flocks are also present in the environment and consist of at least two or more species. In avians the species that tend to flock together are typically similar in taxonomy as well as morphological characters such as size and shape. By having a flock with multiple species present, the defence against predation increases. Defence against predators is particularly important in closed habitats such as forests where early warning calls play a vital importance in the early recognition of danger. The result is the formation of many mixed-species feeding flocks.

While mixed flocks are typically thought to be composed of two different species, it is specifically the two different behaviours of the species that compose a mixed flock. Within a mixed flock there can be two different behavioural characteristics: sally and gleaner. Sallies are individuals that act as guards of the flock and consume prey in the air during flight. On the other hand, gleaners are those that consume prey living within vegetation.

Studies have shown that as resources in the aerial environment increase, the flock will possess more sallies than gleaners. This has been shown to occur during forest fires in which insects have been flushed from vegetation, however this can also be done by the gleaners. When gleaners obtain meals from vegetation it causes the other prey within the vegetation to be flushed out into the aerial environment. It is through this specific behaviour of feeding among vegetation that the gleaners indirectly increase the foraging rate of the sallies.

Those birds that are more rare and therefore less abundant in an environment are more likely to perform in this mixed flock behaviour. Despite the fact that this bird is more likely to be a subordinate, its ability to obtain food increases substantially. As well this bird is now less likely to be attacked by a predator because predators have a lower success rate when attacking large flocks.

The ability to avoid predation is one of the most important skills necessary in order to increase one's fitness. It can be seen that by ground squirrels living in colonies, the ability to recognize a predator is rapid. The squirrel is then able to use vocalizations to warn conspecifics of the possible threat. This simple example demonstrates that flocks are not only seen in bird species or a herd of sheep, but it is also apparent in other animals such as rodents. This alarm call of the ground squirrel requires the ability of the animal to first recognize that there is danger present and then to react. This type of behaviour is also seen in some birds. It is important to note that by making an alarm call to signal members of the flock one is providing the predator with an acoustical cue to the location of a possible prey. The benefit here is if the members of the flock are genetically related to one another. If this is true, even if the bird that signalled the flock were to die its fitness would not decrease according to Hamilton's Rule. However another study involving thick-knees challenged whether or not an animal had to recognize the presence of a predator for protection against it.

Thick-knees are birds that are seen in large flocks during particular seasons in various regions of the world. During the nonbreeding season, Peruvian thick-knees in Chile are reported to have an average of 22.5 birds — a mixture of adults and youngsters — in their flocks. Young birds were observed learning anti-predator behaviour strategies from adults during this time. Researchers believe that the flocking behaviour may help to decrease a predator's success rate when attacking the flock, rather than increasing the ability of the flock to spot an approaching predator.

By birds co-existing with one another in a flock, less time and energy is spent searching for predators. This mutual protection of one another within the flock is one of the benefits to living within a group. However, as flock numbers increase the more aggressive individuals within the flock become towards one another. This is one of the costs to living within a flock. It is often seen that flocks are dynamic and thus fluctuate in size depending on the needs of individuals in order the maximize benefits without incurring a large amount of costs.

By living in a large flock, birds are also able to attack the predator with a stronger force compared to if the bird was on its own. In the black-capped chickadees it can be seen that flocks of birds can produce a mobbing call when it visualizes a possible predator. In response the black-capped chickadees within the flock surround the predator and attack it in a mob-like fashion in order to force the predator to leave. This is known as mobbing. This mobbing behaviour is quickly learned by the juveniles within a flock meaning that these individuals will be better equipped as adults to ward off predators and respond rapidly when a predator is in sight.

Bird species living in a flock are able to capture prey, likely injured, from an unsuccessful bird within its flock. This behavior is known as the beater effect and is one of the benefits of birds foraging in a flock with other birds.

It can be seen that birds in a flock may perform the information-sharing model. In this situation the entire flock would search for food and the first to find a reliable food source will alert the flock and the entire group may benefit by this finding. While this is an obvious benefit of the information-sharing model, the cost is that the social hierarchy of the flock may result in subordinate birds being denied food by those that are dominant. Another cost is the possibility that some individuals may refuse to contribute in the search of food and instead simply wait for another member to find a food resource. These individuals are known as producers and scroungers, respectively.

An intricate hunting system can be seen in the Harris's hawk in which groups of 2–6 hunt a single prey together. The group splits into smaller groups in which it then encloses on a prey, such as a rabbit, before it attacks it. By hunting as a group the Harris's Hawk is able to hunt larger animals and decrease the amount of energy spent hunting while each hawk in the group is able to eat from the catch.

In the Denmark, there is a biannual phenomenon known as "sort sol" (Danish for "black sun"). This is when flocks of European starlings gather in vast numbers, creating complex shapes against the sky during the spring. It is during this time spent in Denmark that the European starlings spend time gathering food and resting as part of their migration journey. By being in groups this large the European starlings are able to decrease their risk of predation by hawks.


</doc>
<doc id="520284" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=520284" title="Helpers at the nest">
Helpers at the nest

Helpers at the nest is a term used in behavioural ecology and evolutionary biology to describe a social structure in which juveniles and sexually mature adolescents of either one or both sexes remain in association with their parents and help them raise subsequent broods or litters, instead of dispersing and beginning to reproduce themselves. This phenomenon was first studied in birds where it occurs most frequently, but it is also known in animals from many different groups including mammals and insects. It is a simple form of co-operative breeding. The effects of helpers usually amount to a net benefit, however, benefits are not uniformly distributed by all helpers nor across all species that exhibit this behaviour. There are multiple proposed explanations for the behaviour, but its variability and broad taxonomic occurrences result in simultaneously plausible theories.

The term "helper" was coined by Alexander Skutch in 1935 and defined more carefully in 1961 in the avian context as "a bird which assists in the nesting of an individual other than its mate, or feeds or otherwise attends a bird of whatever age which is neither its mate nor its dependent offspring." The term has been criticised as being anthropomorphic, but it remains in use. Other terms used especially in mammals, depending on the specific contexts, are non-maternal (care by other than the mother), alloparental (care by other than the parents), cooperative (care by non-breeding helpers) and communal (care by other breeding females) care.

It occurs in between three and eight percent of bird species worldwide (estimates vary), but is much more common in Australia and Southern Africa. Bird species in which this behaviour is found include the common moorhen, the acorn woodpecker, and the apostlebird. Damarland mole rats, meerkats and humans are examples of mammals that exhibit this behaviour. It is also seen in a number of species of bee such as carpenter bees (note this is distinct from the behaviour of the European honey bee, where the worker bees are sterile and incapable of reproducing).

Three explanations for the occurrence of helpers at the nest have been put forward; they are not mutually exclusive, and in any particular species an investigation of the exact benefits and costs will be needed to see what combination of these factors may have driven the evolution of helping.


Although it is frequently assumed that helpers are non-breeders, molecular evidence suggests that this may happen, and the term "secondary helper" is sometimes used in this case to indicate helpers that mate with or are not related offspring of the pair being assisted. The term "primary helper" being used for the commoner case of the helper being offspring of the pair and not involved in mating. Extrapair mates are chosen by the females and are these then contribute to the care of the young who may be sired by them.

Juveniles living in association with their parents cannot automatically be regarded as helpers. In a number of species, such as the logrunners and the Siberian jay, young remain in the parental territory, but never help feed nestlings. However the delayed advantage explanation for the juveniles' association with their parents can still work in the absence of effective helping, whereas the kin selection explanation cannot.

Effects on reproductive success can be but are not always positive, and the strength of that positive correlation varies by species. Sometimes, the energy benefits to breeders, instead of being invested in improving reproductive performance, are used to offset reductions in reproductive performance. However, in many species, nestling survival rates are increased from helper investments. Further reproductive success benefits include better quality offspring, and nestling immune response.

Helpers at the nest can provide advantageous plasticity in the amount of investment parents need to give to their eggs and chicks. The presence of helpers can be associated with lower investments as the helpers can be depended on to provide certain elements of care and raising. For example, in the superb fairy-wren, nests with helpers present exhibit different average egg sizes than those without helpers. This plasticity can be seen in reference to change in climate conditions. In unfavourable conditions there is a need for female parents to maintain high egg investment, but in favourable conditions, egg investment by mothers declines as helpers can assist with some of the care-load. Superb fairy-wrens with helpers at the nest see average egg sizes increase in dry and hot conditions and decrease in colder conditions compared to nests without helpers.

Generally, helpers provide a net benefit to parents raising offspring, but this benefit is not necessarily distributed uniformly. There can be an uneven distribution of benefits between species, or even between sexes within a species. Benefits provided by one sex may more heavily fluctuate according to various factors such as food availability. In acorn woodpeckers, while helpers of both sexes provide relatively the same benefit to reproductive success, male helper behaviour fluctuates. This fluctuation is dependent upon the size of recent acorn crops. Large acorn crops translate to increased behavioural effects from male helpers such as higher rates of granary tending and time spent in the home territory.

Helpers often also benefit from joining a breeding couple. After unsuccessfully breeding, juveniles may join breeding couples to become helpers. By opting to become helpers while still juveniles and having poor breeding prospects, helpers can benefit from increased survival rates. A trade-off of this increased survival over non-helper juveniles is that their successful breeding rate after becoming helpers decreases compared to non-helpers.



</doc>
<doc id="1847013" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=1847013" title="Hoarding (animal behavior)">
Hoarding (animal behavior)

Hoarding or caching in animal behavior is the storage of food in locations hidden from the sight of both conspecifics (animals of the same or closely related species) and members of other species. Most commonly, the function of hoarding or caching is to store food in times of surplus for times when food is less plentiful. However, there is evidence that some amount of caching or hoarding is done in order to ripen the food, called ripening caching. The term hoarding is most typically used for rodents, whereas caching is more commonly used in reference to birds, but the behaviors in both animal groups are quite similar.

Hoarding is done either on a long-term basis – cached on a seasonal cycle, with food to be consumed months down the line – or on a short term basis, in which case the food will be consumed over a period of one or several days.

Some common animals that cache their food are rodents such as hamsters and squirrels, and many different bird species, such as rooks and woodpeckers. The western scrub jay is noted for its particular skill at caching. There are two types of caching behavior: larder-hoarding, where a species creates a few large caches which it often defends, and scatter-hoarding, where a species will create multiple caches, often with each individual food item stored in a unique place. Both types of caching have their advantage.

Caching behavior is typically a way to save excess edible food for later consumption - either soon to be eaten food, such as when a jaguar hangs a partially eaten prey in a tree to be eaten within a few days, or long term where the food is hidden and retrieved many months later. Caching is a common adaptation to seasonal changes in food availability. In regions where winters are harsh, food availability typically becomes low, and caching food during the times of high food availability in the warmer months provides a significant survival advantage. This phenomenon is referenced in the fable The Ant and the Grasshopper.

However, in ripening caching behavior, animals collect and cache food which is immediately inedible but will become "ripe" and edible after a short while. For instance, tayras (a Central American weasel) have been observed to harvest whole green plantains, hide them, and then come back to eat them after they have ripened. Leafcutter ants harvest pieces of inedible leaves and then cache them in underground chambers to ripen with a fungus which is the main food for the colony. Contrary to popular belief, there is no scientific evidence that Crocodillians such as the American Alligator cache large prey underwater to consume later. 

Scatter hoarding is the formation of a large number of small hoards. This behavior is present in both birds (especially the Canada jay) and small mammals, mainly squirrels and other rodents, such as the eastern gray squirrel, fox squirrel, and wood mouse. Specifically, those who do not migrate to warmer climates or hibernate for winter are most likely to scatter hoard. This behavior plays an important part in seed dispersal, as those seeds that are left uneaten will have a chance to germinate, thus enabling plants to spread their populations effectively.

Cache spacing is the primary technique that scatter hoarders use to protect food from pilferers. By spreading the food supply around geographically, hoarders discourage competitors who happen upon a cache from conducting area-restricted searching for more of the supply. Despite cache spacing, however, hoarders are still unable to completely eliminate the threat of pilferage. However, having multiple cache sites is costly because it requires a good memory. Scatter-hoarders generally have a large hippocampus.

In larder hoarding, the hoard is large and is found in a single place termed a larder, which usually also serves as the nest where the animal lives. Hamsters are famous larder hoarders. Indeed, the German verb "hamstern" (to hoard) is derived from the noun "Hamster" which refers to the rodent; similar verbs are found in various related languages (Dutch "hamsteren", and Swedish "hamstra"). Other languages also draw a clear connection between hamsters and hoarding: Polish "chomikować", from "chomik" – hamster; Hebrew "hamster"; "oger" (אוגר) comes from "to hoard"; "le'egor" (לאגור). A disadvantage of larder hoarding is that if a cache is raided, this is far more problematic for the animal than if it were a scatter hoarder. While the hoard is much easier to remember the location of, these larger hoards must also be more staunchly defended.

Most species are particularly wary of onlooking individuals during caching and ensure that the cache locations are secret. Not all caches are concealed however, for example shrikes store prey items on thorns on branches in the open.

Although a small handful of species share food stores, food hoarding is a solo endeavor for most species, including almost all rodents and birds. For example, a number of jays live in large family groups, but they don't demonstrate sharing of cached food. Rather, they hoard their food supply selfishly, caching and retrieving the supply in secret.

There are only two species in which kin selection has resulted in a shared food store, i.e. beavers ("Castor canadensis") and acorn woodpeckers ("Melanerpes formicivorous"); the former live in family groups and construct winter larders of submerged branches, while the latter are unusual in that they construct a conspicuous communal larder.

Pilferage occurs when one animal takes food from another animal's larder.
Some species experience high levels of cache pilferage, up to 30% of the supply per day. Models of scatter hoarding suggested the value of cached food is equal to the hoarders ability to retrieve it.

It has been observed that members of certain species, such as rodents and chickadees, act as both hoarder and pilferer. In other words, pilfering can be reciprocal and, thus, tolerable. Although this kind of food caching system seems cooperative, it has been suggested that it is actually driven by the selfish interests of the individual.

Animals recache the food that they've pilfered from other animal's caches.
For example, 75% percent of mildly radioactive (thus traceable) Jeffrey pine seeds cached by yellow pine chipmunks were found in two cache sites, 29% of the seeds were found in three sites, 9.4% were found in four sites and 1.3% were found in five sites over a 3-month period. These results, and those from other studies, demonstrate the dynamic nature of the food supplies of scatter hoarding animals.

Group-foraging common ravens, ("Corvus corax"), scatter hoard their food and also raid the caches made by others. Cachers withdraw from conspecifics when hiding their food and most often place their caches behind structures, obstructing the view of potential observers. Raiders watch inconspicuously and keep at a distance to cachers close to their cache sites. In response to the presence of potential raiders or because of their initial movements towards caches, the cachers frequently interrupt caching, change cache sites, or recover their food items. These behaviors suggest that ravens are capable of withholding information about their intentions, which may qualify as tactical deception.

Similarly, Eurasian jays ("Garrulus glandarius") when being watched by another jay, prefer to cache food behind an opaque barrier rather than a transparent barrier, suggesting they may opt to cache in out-of-view locations to reduce the likelihood of other jays pilfering their caches.


Jenkins, Stewart H. and Breck, Stewart W. (1998) "Differences in food hoarding among six species of heteromyid rodents." J Mammal. 79:1221-1233.



</doc>
<doc id="14606380" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14606380" title="Humphrey–Parkes terminology">
Humphrey–Parkes terminology

Humphrey–Parkes terminology is a system of nomenclature for the plumage of birds. Before the Humphrey–Parkes system, plumage was named after the belief that a certain plumage was breeding plumage and others were not. However, as this system did not always work correctly, the new Humphrey–Parkes came into use to rectify this error. This terminology is named after Humphrey, P. S. Humphrey and K. C. Parkes.

Under the Humphrey–Parkes nomenclature, the main adult plumage, especially when it is produced by a complete molt, is called basic plumage. In most birds, the non-breeding plumage, which is worn longer than the breeding plumage, is known as the basic plumage. In birds that molt only once a year, the regular and only plumage is known as basic plumage.

In some birds, a partial molt occurs before the bird breeds. This plumage is known as the alternate plumage and is generally what was previously known as a bird's breeding plumage. If a bird produces a third plumage in addition to the basic and alternative, it is known as supplemental plumage. This plumage is most frequently found in ptarmigans. The unique plumage of a juvenile bird is known as juvenal (or less precisely, juvenile) plumage.

When the bird is molting, the molt is known as a prejuvenal, prebasic, prealternate, or presupplemental molt, depending on which type follows the molt.

For birds that do not completely molt into full adult plumage the first time, a numbering system is used to signify which plumage it is in. For example, for the first time a bird enters basic plumage, the plumage is known as first basic plumage; the second, second basic plumage. The numbers are dropped after a bird achieves its full adult plumage.


</doc>
<doc id="4185154" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=4185154" title="Mixed-species foraging flock">
Mixed-species foraging flock

A mixed-species feeding flock, also termed a mixed-species foraging flock, mixed hunting party or informally bird wave, is a flock of usually insectivorous birds of different species that join each other and move together while foraging. These are different from feeding aggregations, which are congregations of several species of bird at areas of high food availability.

A mixed-species foraging flock typically has "nuclear" species that appear to be central to its formation and movement. Species that trail them are termed "attendants". Attendants tend to join the foraging flock only when the flock enters their territory.

How such flocks are initiated is under investigation. In Sri Lanka, for example, vocal mimicry by the greater racket-tailed drongo might have a key role in the initiation of mixed-species foraging flocks, while in parts of the American tropics noisy packs of foraging golden-crowned warblers might play the same role. Forest structure is also believed to be an important factor deciding the propensity to form flocks. In tropical forests, birds that glean food from foliage were the most abundant species in mixed-species flocks.

A typical Neotropic mixed feeding flock moves through the forest at about , with different species foraging in their preferred niches (on the ground, on trunks, in high or low foliage, etc.). Some species follow the flock all day, while others – such as the long-billed gnatwren – join it only as long as it crosses their own territories.

Several evolutionary mechanisms have been proposed to explain the formation of mixed-species flocks. These are usually described in terms of the costs and benefits to individuals. The key benefits that have been suggested are a reduction in predation risk through increased vigilance, that is, more eyes that can spot predators and raise an alarm and increased foraging efficiency. Costs could include the risk of kleptoparasitism.

In the North Temperate Zone, they are typically led by Paridae (tits and chickadees), often joined by nuthatches, treecreepers, woodpeckers (such as the downy woodpecker and lesser spotted woodpecker), kinglets, and in North America Parulidae (New World "warblers") – all insect-eating birds. This behavior is particularly common outside the breeding season.

The advantages of this behavior are not certain, but evidence suggests that it confers some safety from predators, especially for the less watchful birds such as vireos (vireos) and woodpeckers, and also improves feeding efficiency, perhaps because arthropod prey that flee one bird may be caught by another.

Insectivorous feeding flocks reach their fullest development in tropical forests, where they are a typical feature of bird life. In the Neotropics the leaders or "core" members may be black-throated shrike-tanagers in southern Mexico, or three-striped warblers elsewhere in Central America. In South America, core species may include antbirds such as "Thamnomanes", antshrikes, Furnariidae (ovenbirds and woodcreepers) like the buff-fronted foliage-gleaner or the olivaceous woodcreeper, or Parulidae (New World "warblers") like the golden-crowned warblers. In open cerrado habitat, it may be white-rumped or white-banded tanagers. Core species often have striking plumage and calls that attract other birds; they are often also known to be very active sentinels, providing warning of would-be predators.

But while such easy-to-locate bird species serve as a focal point for flock members, they do not necessarily initiate the flock. In one Neotropic mixed flock feeding on swarming termites, it was observed that buff-throated warbling finches were most conspicuous. As this species is not an aerial insectivore, it is unlikely to have actually initiated the flock rather than happening across it and joining in. And while "Basileuterus" species are initiators as well as core species, mixed flocks of "Tangara" species – in particular red-necked, brassy-breasted, and green-headed tanagers – often initiate formation of a larger and more diverse feeding flock, of which they are then only a less significant component.

Nine-primaried oscines make up much of almost every Neotropical mixed-species feeding flock. Namely, these birds are from families such as the cardinals, Parulidae (New World "warblers"), and in particular Emberizidae (American "sparrows") and Thraupidae (tanagers). Other members of a Neotropic mixed feeding flock may come from most of the local families of smaller diurnal insectivorous birds, and can also include woodpecker, toucans, and trogons. Most Furnariidae do not participate in mixed flocks, though there are exceptions such as "Synallaxis" spinetails and some species of the woodcreeper subfamily – e.g. those mentioned above or the lesser woodcreeper – are common or even "core" members. Among the tyrant flycatchers there are also some species joining mixed flocks on a somewhat regular basis, including the sepia-capped flycatcher, eared pygmy tyrant, white-throated spadebill, and Oustalet's tyrannulet.

However, even of commonly participating families not all species join mixed flocks. There are genera such as "Vireo" in which some species do not join mixed flocks, while others (e.g., the red-eyed vireo) will even do so in their winter quarters. Of the three subspecies groups of the yellow-rumped warbler, only one (Audubon's warbler) typically does. And while the importance of certain Thraupidae in initiating and keeping together mixed flocks has been mentioned already, for example the black-goggled tanager is an opportunistic feeder that will appear at but keep its distance from any disturbance – be it a mixed feeding flock, an army ant column or a group of monkeys – and pick off prey trying to flee.

Gnateaters are notable for their absence from these flocks, while swifts and swallows rarely join them, but will if there is for example an ant or termite swarm. Cotingidae (cotingas) are mainly opportunistic associates which rarely join flocks for long if they do so at all; the same holds true for most Muscicapoidea (mockingbirds and relatives), though some thrushes may participate on more often. And though most Tityridae rarely join mixed flocks, becards do so regularly. Tapaculos are rarely seen with mixed flocks, though the collared crescentchest, doubtfully assigned to that family, may be a regular member. Icteridae (grackles and relatives) are also not too often seen to take part in these assemblages, though caciques like the golden-winged or red-rumped cacique join mixed flocks on a somewhat more regular basis. Cuculiformes (cuckoos and allies) are usually absent from mixed feeding flocks, but some – for example, the squirrel cuckoo – can be encountered not infrequently.

Some species appear to prefer when certain others are present: "Cyanolyca" jays like to flock with unicolored jays and the emerald toucanets species complex. Many Icteridae associate only with related species, but the western subspecies of the yellow-backed oriole associates with jays and the band-backed wren.

Other species participate to varying extents depending on location or altitude – presumably, the different species composition of mixed flocks at varying locations allows these irregular members more or less opportunity to get food. Such species include the grey-hooded flycatcher, or the plain antvireo and the red-crowned ant tanager which are often recorded in lowland flocks but rarely join them at least in some more montane regions.

The flocks in the Old World are often much more loosely bonded than in the Neotropics, many being only casual associations lasting the time the flock of core species spends in the attendants' territory. The more stable flocks are observed in tropical Asia, and especially Sri Lanka. Flocks there may number several hundred birds spending the entire day together, and an observer in the rain forest may see virtually no birds except when encountering a flock. For example, as a flock approaches in the Sinharaja Forest Reserve in Sri Lanka, the typical daytime quiet of the jungle is broken by the noisy calls of the orange-billed babbler and greater racket-tailed drongo, joined by species such as the ashy-headed laughingthrush, Kashmir flycatcher, and velvet-fronted nuthatch.

A mixed flock in the Cordillera Central of Luzon in the Philippines was mainly composed of bar-bellied cuckooshrikes, Philippine fairy-bluebirds, and violaceous crows. Luzon hornbills were also recorded as present. With the crows only joining later and the large hornbills probably only opportunistic attendants rather than core species, it is likely that this flock was started by one of the former species – probably the bold and vocal cuckoo-shrikes rather than the more retiring fairy-bluebirds, which are known to seek out such opportunities to forage.

African rainforests also hold mixed-species flocks, the core species including bulbuls and sunbirds, and attendants being as diverse as the red-billed dwarf hornbill and the tit-hylia, the smallest bird of Africa. Drongos and paradise-flycatchers are sometimes described as the sentinels of the flock, but they are also known to steal prey from other flock members. Acanthizidae are typical core members in New Guinea and Australia; in Australia, fairy-wrens are also significant. The core species are joined by birds of other families such as minivets.


</doc>
<doc id="14225098" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=14225098" title="Pecten oculi">
Pecten oculi

The pecten or pecten oculi is a comb-like structure of blood vessels belonging to the choroid in the eye of a bird. It is a non-sensory, pigmented structure that projects into the vitreous humor from the point where the optic nerve enters the eyeball. The pecten is believed to both nourish the retina and control the pH of the vitreous body. High level of enzyme alkaline phosphatase activity in pecten oculi has been linked to transport of nutrient molecules from highly vascularized pecten oculi into vitreous and then into retinal cells for nourishment. It is present in all birds and some reptiles.

In the vertebrate eye, blood vessels lie in front of the retina, partially obscuring the image. The pecten helps to solve this problem by greatly reducing the number of blood vessels in the retina and leading to the extremely sharp eyesight of birds such as hawks. The pigmentation of the pecten is believed to protect the blood vessels against damage from ultraviolet light. Stray light absorption by melanin granules of pecten oculi is also considered to give rise to small increments in temperature of pecten and eye; this may offer increased metabolic rate to optimize eye physiology in low temperatures at high-altitude flights. The structure varies across bird species and is conical in the kiwi, vaned in the ostrich and pleated in most other birds.




</doc>
<doc id="22040831" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22040831" title="Plucking post">
Plucking post

A plucking post is a raised structure such as a tree stump which is used regularly by a bird of prey to dismember its prey, removing feathers and various other inedible parts before eating it.

The elevated nature of the post allows for a safer landing with the heavy load of the prey, as well as being a good vantage point to scan for other predators, while the bird is vulnerable, involved in the relatively complex process of plucking and feeding upon its prey. Many owls use plucking posts for prey that has been caught on the ground. Barred owls often use old nests for the purpose. Plucking posts are used by barn owls which hunt by flying low and slowly over an area of open ground, hovering over spots that conceal potential prey. The barn owl feeds primarily on small vertebrates, particularly rodents. The common buzzard is another user of plucking posts and has an even more varied diet than the barn owl. The sparrowhawk flies low over the ground, skimming hedges and fences, but staying close to cover so that it can rapidly pounce on its victims. In woodland its agility enables it to fly swiftly between the trunks and branches.

In New Zealand the New Zealand falcon takes its catch to a plucking post to dislocate the bird's neck using the notch on its bill that all falcons have. It then plucks the feathers before eating the entire bird.

Plucking posts are ideal places for setting up bird hides, thus allowing a close observation of bird of prey feeding behaviour.
The post provides a firm surface for an effective grip by the bird's talons and sometimes crevices for helping with the mechanical separation of the prey. Natural tree stumps and man-made structures such as straining and fence posts. Boulders may be used, especially if they have a carpet covering of moss or are cracked or ribbed.

Bird pellets are often found on or around plucking posts, composed of the indigestible items that were consumed by the predator.

Plucking posts, surrounded by feathers and fur, may indicate that a raptor nesting site is nearby and these may be mainly used during the breeding season.

Scientists can use the evidence of plucking posts to provide information about the feeding behaviour of relevant raptors.

It has also been suggested that faeces marks and plucking may represent a widespread method for communicating current reproduction and territory to conspecifics.

In secure or difficult surroundings the plucking post may be at ground level.




</doc>
<doc id="619049" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=619049" title="Rookery">
Rookery

A rookery is a colony of breeding animals, generally birds. A rookery is generally reserved for a colony of gregarious birds. 

While the term rookery may have come from the nesting habits of rooks, it is not reserved for corvids. Rooks – northern-European and central-Asian members of the crow family – nest in prominent colonies (multiple nests) at the tops of trees.

The breeding grounds of colony-forming seabirds and marine mammals (true seals or sea lions) and even some turtles are also referred to as rookeries.

The term "rookery" was also borrowed as a name for dense slum housing in nineteenth-century cities, especially in London.

Paleontological evidence points to the existence of rookery-like colonies in the pterosaur "Pterodaustro".



</doc>
<doc id="8801957" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8801957" title="Skylarking (birds)">
Skylarking (birds)

Skylarking refers to the aerial displays including song made by various species of birds, such as Cassin's sparrow (Peterson 1990). Many skylarking displays are in courtship. Some are referred to as territorial displays by the male. There are some instances in which birdwatchers claim that skylarking has been used by male birds to avoid predators; the objective being that the predator will mistake the prey for another type of bird and end the pursuit. This survival tactic rarely works.


</doc>
<doc id="23943269" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23943269" title="Sort sol">
Sort sol

Sort sol is a murmuration, nature phenomenon in the marshlands in southwestern Jutland, Denmark, in particular the marsh near Tønder and Ribe. Very large numbers of migrational starlings gather there in spring and autumn when they move between their winter grounds in southern Europe and their summer breeding grounds in Scandinavia and other countries near the Baltic Sea.

Sort sol takes place in the hours just after sunset. The birds gather in large flocks and form huge formations in the sky just before they decide for a location to roost for the night. The movements of the formations have been likened to kind of a dance or ballet and the birds are so numerous that they seem to obliterate the sunset, hence the term "sort sol" (Danish for "black sun"). Sort sol in the marsh near Tønder can occasionally comprise a formation with up to one million birds. Usually flocks break up when the number of individuals exceed about half a million birds due to excessive internal disturbances in the flock.

If a predator bird enters the flock, the starlings initiate a veritable bombardment with droppings and vomit that soil the feathers of the predator. In rare cases the sticky deposits may render the predator unable to stay airborne. Over 20 years, there have been two confirmed cases of young northern goshawks that drowned because the incident took place over water. 





</doc>
<doc id="8619843" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=8619843" title="Wattle (anatomy)">
Wattle (anatomy)

A wattle is a fleshy caruncle hanging from various parts of the head or neck in several groups of birds and mammals. Caruncles in birds include those found on the face, wattles, dewlaps, snoods and earlobes. Wattles are generally paired structures but may occur as a single structure when it is sometimes known as a dewlap. Wattles are frequently organs of sexual dimorphism. In some birds, caruncles are erectile tissue and may or may not have a feather covering.

Wattles are often such a striking morphological characteristic of animals that it features in their common name. For example, the southern and northern cassowary are known as the double-wattled and single-wattled cassowary respectively and there is a breed of domestic pig known as the red wattle.

In birds, wattles are often an ornament for courting potential mates. Large wattles are correlated with high testosterone levels, good nutrition, and the ability to evade predators, which in turn indicates a potentially successful mate. It has also been proposed that ornamental organs such as wattles are associated with genes coding for disease resistance. In umbrellabirds the wattle serves to amplify the birds' call. 

Birds with wattles include:

Mammals with wattles include:



</doc>
<doc id="100439" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=100439" title="Wingspan">
Wingspan

The wingspan (or just span) of a bird or an airplane is the distance from one wingtip to the other wingtip. For example, the Boeing 777-200 has a wingspan of , and a wandering albatross ("Diomedea exulans") caught in 1965 had a wingspan of , the official record for a living bird.
The term wingspan, more technically extent, is also used for other winged animals such as pterosaurs, bats, insects, etc., and other aircraft such as ornithopters.
In humans, the term wingspan also refers to the arm span, which is distance between the length from one end of an individual's arms (measured at the fingertips) to the other when raised parallel to the ground at shoulder height at a 90º angle. Former professional basketball player Manute Bol stands at and owns one of the largest wingspans at .

The wingspan of an aircraft is always measured in a straight line, from wingtip to wingtip, independently of wing shape or sweep.

The lift from wings is proportional to their area, so the heavier the animal or aircraft the bigger that area must be. The area is the product of the span times the width (mean chord) of the wing, so either a long, narrow wing or a shorter, broader wing will support the same mass. For efficient steady flight, the ratio of span to chord, the aspect ratio, should be as high as possible (the constraints are usually structural) because this lowers the lift-induced drag associated with the inevitable wingtip vortices. Long-ranging birds, like albatrosses, and most commercial aircraft maximize aspect ratio. Alternatively, animals and aircraft which depend on maneuverability (fighters, predators and the preyed upon, and those who live amongst trees and bushes, insect catchers, etc.) need to be able to roll fast to turn, and the high moment of inertia of long narrow wings, as well as the high angular drag and quick balancing of aileron lift with wing lift at a low rotation rate, produces lower roll rates. For them, short-span, broad wings are preferred. Additionally, ground handling in aircraft is a significant problem for very high aspect ratios and flying animals may encounter similar issues.

The highest aspect ratio man-made wings are aircraft propellers, in their most extreme form as helicopter rotors.
To measure the wingspan of a bird, a live or freshly-dead specimen is placed flat on its back, the wings are grasped at the wrist joints, ankles and the distance is measured between the tips of the longest primary feathers on each wing.

The wingspan of an insect refers to the wingspan of pinned specimens, and may refer to the distance between the centre of the thorax to the apex of the wing doubled or to the width between the apices with the wings set with the trailing wing edge perpendicular to the body.

In basketball and gridiron football, a fingertip-to-fingertip measurement is used to determine the player's wingspan, also called armspan. This is called reach in boxing terminology. The wingspan of 16-year-old BeeJay Anya, a top basketball Junior Class of 2013 prospect who played for the NC State Wolfpack, was officially measured at across, one of the longest of all National Basketball Association draft prospects, and the longest ever for a non-7-foot player, though Anya went undrafted in 2017. The wingspan of Manute Bol, at , is (as of 2013) the longest in NBA history, and his vertical reach was .




</doc>
<doc id="44064999" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=44064999" title="Telluraves">
Telluraves

Telluraves (also called land birds or core landbirds) is a recently defined clade of birds with controversial content. Based on most recent genetic studies, the clade unites a variety of bird groups, including the australavians (passerines, parrots, seriamas, and falcons) as well as the afroavians (including the Accipitrimorphae – eagles, hawks, buzzards, vultures etc. – owls and woodpeckers, among others). They appear to be the sister group of a newly defined clade centered on Aequornithes.

Given that the most basal extant members of both Afroaves (Accipitrimorphae, Strigiformes) and Australaves (Cariamiformes, Falconiformes) are carnivorous, it has been suggested that the last common ancestor of all Telluraves was probably a predator. Other researchers are skeptical of this assessment, citing the herbivorous cariamiform "Strigogyps" as evidence to the contrary.

Cladogram of Telluraves relationships based on Prum, R.O. "et al." (2015) with some clade names after Yuri, T. "et al." (2013) and Kimball "et al." 2013.


</doc>
<doc id="5207246" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=5207246" title="Pecten (biology)">
Pecten (biology)

A pecten (plural pectens or pectines) is a comb-like structure, widely found in the biological world. Although pectens in various animals look similar, they have a varied range of uses, from grooming and filtering to sensory adaptations.

The adjective, pectinate, means supplied with a comb-like structure. This form, cognate to pecten with both derived from the Latin for comb, "pectin" (genitive "pectinis"), is reflected in numerous scientific names in forms such as pectinata, pectinatus or pectinatum, or in specific epithets such as "Murex pecten". Some toothcombs are referred to as pectinations.

In ducks, they are placed on the sides of the bill and serve both as a strainer for food and a comb for preening. Whales have a similar oral comb-like structure called baleen.

The avian eye also contains a structure called a pecten oculi, which is a comb-like projection of the retina. It is thought to enhance nutrition for the cells of the retina.

They also occur on the underside of scorpions, where they are used as sensory organs.


</doc>
<doc id="50162038" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=50162038" title="Odontoanserae">
Odontoanserae

The Odontoanserae is a proposed clade that includes the family Pelagornithidae (pseudo-toothed birds) and the clade Anserimorphae (the order Anseriformes and their stem-relatives). The placement of the pseudo-toothed birds in the evolutionary tree of birds has been problematic, with some supporting the placement of them near the orders Procellariformes and Pelecaniformes based on features in the sternum.

In 2005 a cladistic analysis had found support in placing pseudo-toothed birds as the sister group to waterfowl. Evidence for this comes from shared characteristics in the skull such as lack of a crest on the underside of the palatine bone and two condyles on the mandibular process of the quadrate bone, with the middle condyle beakwards of the side condyle. In addition to that, both groups have similar features in their pelvic and pectoral regions. Furthermore, a 2013 study on the growth pattern and structure of the pseudoteeth in "Pelagornis mauretanicus" shows more support of Odontoanserae as both groups have "soft rhamphotheca, or delayed hardening of the rhamphotheca." In addition to Pelagornithidae and Anseriformes paleontologists also have support in placing mihirungs (Dromornithidae) and Gastornithids into this group, as they too also share anatomical features in the skull and pelvic bones with waterfowl. The mihirungs and the gastornithids are more derived than the pseudo-tooth birds and are closer to Anseriformes. One hypothesis is that diatryams and mihirungs are successive sister groups to anseriforms and another hypothesis places mihirungs as crown anseriforms closely related to the screamers (Anhimidae).

Below is the general consensus of the phylogeny.
However, a 2017 paper by Worthy and colleagues found an alternative phylogeny concerning Anserimorphae. By adding additional new characters, as well as incorporating several new taxa into established matrices, the authors have found gastornithids and mihirungs to be sister taxa which could be placed in the order Gastornithiformes. In addition, they have found support that the family Vegaviidae (usually classified as crown anseriforms or their sister taxon) are more related to gastornithiforms than to anseriforms; accordingly, they have created the monotypic order Vegaviiformes. The authors did note the bootstrap support is weakly supported and several alternative phylogenies in their paper found gastornithiforms to be stem galliforms instead. These too were weakly supported as well. Below is a simplified phylogeny showing their one phylogeny supporting gastornithiforms as anserimorphs.
In 2019 a new species "Conflicto antarcticus" was described from Early Paleocene deposits in Antarctica. Known completely from associated bones from a single individual, Tambussi et al. (2019) incorporated the new taxon into a phylogenetic analysis using the matrix data from Worthy et al. (2017). Their results not only supported the sister grouping of vegaviids with gastornithids and mihirungs (which included Vegaviidae into Gastornithiformes), but also found two taxa, "Anatalavis rex" and the tall, wading presbyornithids, traditionally placed as part of the anseriform crown, to be stem-anseriforms. Below is the Tambussi et al. (2019) phylogeny.


</doc>
<doc id="22306096" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=22306096" title="Neotropical Birds Online">
Neotropical Birds Online

Neotropical Birds Online is an online encyclopedia whose subject is the bird species that breed in the Neotropics.

"Neotropical Birds Online" is patterned after "Birds of North America". Each account profiles a single species, and the accounts are published in the order in which they are completed. The project is sponsored by the Cornell Lab of Ornithology at Cornell University, a leading US research center in ornithology. The list of species covered by "Neotropical Birds Online" is based on the two avian checklist committees of the American Ornithologists' Union: the North American Classification Committee (NACC), which is responsible for the taxonomy and nomenclature of bird species found in North and Central America, including the Caribbean; and the South American Classification Committee, which covers the birds of South America and of related islands.

Each species account has a consistent format. The content of each account provides comprehensive information for each species. The topics that are covered include identification, distribution and habitat, foraging and reproductive behavior, the conservation status of the species, and the author's suggestions for the highest priorities for future research on that species. Also provided are a map of the distribution of the species and, when available, photographs of the species, its habitat, and of the nest and eggs. Also provided, when available, are recordings of the species' song and calls, selected from the collection in the Macaulay Library at the Cornell Lab of Ornithology and from other online sources, such as xeno-canto.




</doc>
<doc id="6777407" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=6777407" title="Birdcage">
Birdcage

A birdcage (or bird cage) is a cage designed to house birds as pets.

Antique (or antique-style) birdcages are often popular as collectors' items or as household decor but most are not suitable for housing live birds, being too small, improper shape, using unsafe materials or construction. Good quality cages designed for pet birds are more suitable.

In general, the larger and the more active the bird, the larger the cage one should use. The amount of time the bird will spend in the cage each day is also a factor. A bird that is caged most of the time requires far more space than a bird caged only at night.

Some birds have special requirements. Amazons and cockatiels prefer horizontal bars, as they like to climb. Messy eaters should have a seed skirt to catch food. Breeding birds may require a nest or breeding box and a larger size cage. Smart birds, like parrots and crows, need secure latching mechanisms to prevent them from figuring them out, and often require toys and/or play-stands to keep them entertained. Parrots in general tend to gnaw on cages, with larger macaws known to tear bars from flimsy cages. Zinc coated cages or chicken wire could cause toxicity to parrots over a number of years.

Most parrot cages are made of wrought iron and painted with a non-toxic paint referred to as powder-coating. A newer trend is cages made of solid stainless steel. Large parrot cages made of stainless steel are costly but will outlast a powder-coated cage by 5 to 6 times. The materials used to build the cages greatly affect the price. While small cages are relatively cheap, large parrot-sized cages are expensive.

A cage for a tame pet bird which is allowed out daily should be large enough to allow it to easily extend its wings fully without hitting cage sides or toys or objects within the cage. In some countries, it is illegal to house a pet bird in a cage that does not permit it to spread its wings. Wingspans of common pet birds range from approximately for a budgie and for a cockatiel up to as much as for the larger macaws. Rectangular cages have replaced rounded cages due to the damaged wings caused by non bird friendly round cages.

Untamed birds which are not allowed out of their cages regularly, such as most finches and canaries, require larger cages that are long enough to permit some flight. The bars should be spaced so that curious birds cannot stick their heads out of the cage and become stuck. The cage should also have non-toxic paint, because birds tend to gnaw at the cage, and if the paint is consumed, they can die from poisoning.

Cages should also be equipped with appropriate perches. There should be several diameters of perches available, but the diameter should be large enough so that the bird's toes are unable to overlap or completely wrap around the perch. Flight cages and aviaries should be equipped with perches at each end with open space in the middle for flight.



</doc>
<doc id="52872120" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=52872120" title="Glossary of bird terms">
Glossary of bird terms

The following is a glossary of common English language terms used in the description of birds—warm-blooded vertebrates of the class Aves, characterized by , the ability to in all but the approximately 60 extant species of flightless birds, toothless, , the laying of hard-shelled eggs, a high metabolic rate, a four-chambered heart and a strong yet lightweight skeleton. 

Among other details such as size, proportions and shape, terms defining bird features developed and are used to describe features unique to the class—especially evolutionary adaptations that developed to aid flight. There are, for example, numerous terms describing the complex structural makeup of feathers (e.g., , and ); types of feathers (e.g., , and feathers); and their growth and loss (e.g., , and ).

There are thousands of terms that are unique to the study of birds. This glossary makes no attempt to cover them all, concentrating on terms that might be found across descriptions of multiple bird species by bird enthusiasts and ornithologists. Though words that are not unique to birds are also covered, such as or , they are defined in relation to other unique features of external bird anatomy, sometimes called . As a rule, this glossary does not contain individual entries on any of the approximately 9,700 recognized living individual bird species of the world.

 

 



</doc>
<doc id="30519229" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30519229" title="Birds of the Amazon">
Birds of the Amazon

An immense number of bird species live in the Amazon rainforest and river basin (an area which is nominally home to one out of every ten known species of animal). Over 1,300 of these species are types of birds, which accounts for one-third of all bird species in the world. The diets of rainforest birds greatly differ between species, although, nuts, fruits and leaves are a common food for many birds in the Amazon. Birds migrate to the Amazon rainforest from the North or South. Amazon birds are threatened by deforestation since they primarily reside in the treetops. At its current rate of destruction, the rainforest will be gone in forty years. Human encroachment also negatively affects the habitat of many Amazonian birds. Agriculture and road clearings limits the habitable areas. Birds in the Amazon are distinguished by which layer of the rainforest they reside in. Each layer or community has unique plants, animals and ecosystems. Birds interact with other animals in their community through the food chain, competition, mating, altruism and symbiosis.

The Amazon rainforest has four layers, each of which has its own unique ecosystem. The top layer is the emergent (or dominants) where the tallest trees are found (up to 200 feet tall). Many birds, such as eagles and parrots, also reside in the emergent. The primary layer is the canopy where about 70 to 90 percent of all rainforest life resides. Plants in this layer have a large amount of fruit, seeds and flowers. Birds such as the toucan live in the canopy. The understory is the next layer where very little sunshine reaches; only about 2 to 15 percent of sunshine reaches the understory. The darkest layer is the forest floor, where most of the larger animals live.
With multiple environments, the Amazon rainforest is able to provide a home to thousands of birds with different survival needs. Amazonia is commonly dived into eight areas of endemism (districts): Napo, Imeri, Guiana, Inambari, Rondonia, Tapahos, Xingu and Belem. Although each area is similar in ecological characteristics, their biotas were assembled differently.

With the progressive destruction of the rainforest comes a loss of habitats for many species of birds. As of today, over twenty percent of the original Amazon rainforest is gone, mostly as a result of deforestation and human encroachment. Human-made clearing has had important effects on bird species. Two to four million hectares are being cleared each year by large-scale clearings for various reasons including the construction of roads, power lines, hydroelectric projects, mining site development and government colonization programs. Deforestation, road clearings, lodging and agriculture are all related causes of the destruction of Amazonian birds' habitat.

Deforestation of the Amazon rainforest is a continually growing problem which affects all animals and a major threat to migrating birds because it changes or removes sections of ecosystems and habitats. Birds may discover that the rainforest they flew to last year is seriously damaged or no longer exists. This is common for many birds that breed in the northern and southern hemisphere but migrate to the Amazon rainforest for food and shelter that are not available at their breeding places during cold months. Migrating birds greatly rely on rainforests for food, rest and recovery after their dangerous migration during which they can lose 30% of their body weight.

Since the 1970s, cattle pasture has been the leading cause of deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon. Land is often cleared for investment purposes due to pastureland prices exceeding forest land prices. In this case, large amounts of forest are torn down and replaced with savanna grasses for cattle feeding. This situation is continually becoming worse as Brazil grows as a producer of beef. Poor farmers are encouraged to settle on rainforest lands by government land policies in Brazil. The process of clearing land includes removing the understory shrubbery and then cutting down the trees. After the area has been left to dry for a few months, the rest is burned. Once the land is cleared, it can be used to plant crops. However, the productivity of the soil declines after a year or two of farming. When this occurs, farmers clear new forest for more short-term agricultural land.

Logging in the Amazon is controlled by strict licensing. Timber is only allowed to be harvested in specific areas. However, these rules are not always followed and excessive amounts of timber are illegally cut down every year. Logging is closely related with road clearings. Areas that have been selectively logged are eight times more likely to be settled and cleared than untouched rainforest areas. Roads that are created for access to lodging give people better access to rainforests. This enables further use of natural rainforest materials for agricultural lands, fuel, building material and more. The creation of roads and logging deters birds and other animals from living in those sections of the forest. It can be observed that there is a lot less bird movement near areas with roads and lodging than those without. Understory species are especially vulnerable to effects of road clearing. Even roads that are narrow with less traffic can have a significant impact on the movements of insectivorous birds in the Amazon.


</doc>
<doc id="201943" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=201943" title="Bird migration">
Bird migration

Bird migration is the regular seasonal movement, often north and south along a flyway, between breeding and wintering grounds. Many species of bird migrate. Migration carries high costs in predation and mortality, including from hunting by humans, and is driven primarily by availability of food. It occurs mainly in the northern hemisphere, where birds are funneled on to specific routes by natural barriers such as the Mediterranean Sea or the Caribbean Sea.

Migration of species such as storks, turtle doves, and swallows was recorded as many as 3,000 years ago by Ancient Greek authors, including Homer and Aristotle, and in the Book of Job. More recently, Johannes Leche began recording dates of arrivals of spring migrants in Finland in 1749, and modern scientific studies have used techniques including bird ringing and satellite tracking to trace migrants. Threats to migratory birds have grown with habitat destruction especially of stopover and wintering sites, as well as structures such as power lines and wind farms.

The Arctic tern holds the long-distance migration record for birds, travelling between Arctic breeding grounds and the Antarctic each year. Some species of tubenoses (Procellariiformes) such as albatrosses circle the earth, flying over the southern oceans, while others such as Manx shearwaters migrate between their northern breeding grounds and the southern ocean. Shorter migrations are common, including altitudinal migrations on mountains such as the Andes and Himalayas.

The timing of migration seems to be controlled primarily by changes in day length. Migrating birds navigate using celestial cues from the sun and stars, the earth's magnetic field, and mental maps.

In the Pacific, traditional landfinding techniques used by Micronesians and Polynesians suggest that bird migration was observed and interpreted for more than 3000 years. In Samoan tradition, for example, Tagaloa sent his daughter Sina to Earth in the form of a bird, Tuli, to find dry land, the word tuli referring specifically to landfinding waders, often to the Pacific golden plover. Records of bird migration were also known in Europe from at least 3,000 years ago as indicated by the Ancient Greek writers Hesiod, Homer, Herodotus and Aristotle. The Bible also notes migrations, as in the Book of Job, where the inquiry is made: "Is it by your insight that the hawk hovers, spreads its wings southward?" The author of Jeremiah wrote: "Even the stork in the heavens know its seasons, and the turtle dove, the swift and the crane keep the time of their arrival."

Aristotle noted that cranes traveled from the steppes of Scythia to marshes at the headwaters of the Nile. Pliny the Elder, in his "Historia Naturalis", repeats Aristotle's observations.

Aristotle, however, suggested that swallows and other birds hibernated. This belief persisted as late as 1878, when Elliott Coues listed the titles of no less than 182 papers dealing with the hibernation of swallows. Even the "highly observant" Gilbert White, in his posthumously published 1789 "The Natural History of Selborne", quoted a man's story about swallows being found in a chalk cliff collapse "while he was a schoolboy at Brighthelmstone", though the man denied being an eyewitness. However, he also writes that "as to swallows being found in a torpid state during the winter in the Isle of Wight or any part of this country, I never heard any such account worth attending to", and that if early swallows "happen to find frost and snow they immediately withdraw for a time—a circumstance this much more in favour of hiding than migration", since he doubts they would "return for a week or two to warmer latitudes".

It was not until the end of the eighteenth century that migration as an explanation for the winter disappearance of birds from northern climes was accepted. Thomas Bewick's "A History of British Birds" (Volume 1, 1797) mentions a report from "a very intelligent master of a vessel" who, "between the islands of Menorca and Majorca, saw great numbers of Swallows flying northward", and states the situation in Britain as follows:

Bewick then describes an experiment which succeeded in keeping swallows alive in Britain for several years, where they remained warm and dry through the winters. He concludes:

In 1822, a white stork was found in the German state of Mecklenburg with an arrow made from central African hardwood, which provided some of the earliest evidence of long-distance stork migration. This bird was referred to as a "Pfeilstorch", German for "Arrow stork". Since then, around 25 "Pfeilstörche" have been documented.

Migration is the regular seasonal movement, often north and south, undertaken by many species of birds. Bird movements include those made in response to changes in food availability, habitat, or weather. Sometimes, journeys are not termed "true migration" because they are irregular (nomadism, invasions, irruptions) or in only one direction (dispersal, movement of young away from natal area). Migration is marked by its annual seasonality. Non-migratory birds are said to be resident or sedentary. Approximately 1800 of the world's 10,000 bird species are long-distance migrants.

Many bird populations migrate long distances along a flyway. The most common pattern involves flying north in the spring to breed in the temperate or Arctic summer and returning in the autumn to wintering grounds in warmer regions to the south. Of course, in the southern hemisphere the directions are reversed, but there is less land area in the far south to support long-distance migration.

The primary motivation for migration appears to be food; for example, some hummingbirds choose not to migrate if fed through the winter. Also, the longer days of the northern summer provide extended time for breeding birds to feed their young. This helps diurnal birds to produce larger clutches than related non-migratory species that remain in the tropics. As the days shorten in autumn, the birds return to warmer regions where the available food supply varies little with the season.

These advantages offset the high stress, physical exertion costs, and other risks of the migration. Predation can be heightened during migration: Eleonora's falcon "Falco eleonorae", which breeds on Mediterranean islands, has a very late breeding season, coordinated with the autumn passage of southbound passerine migrants, which it feeds to its young. A similar strategy is adopted by the greater noctule bat, which preys on nocturnal passerine migrants. The higher concentrations of migrating birds at stopover sites make them prone to parasites and pathogens, which require a heightened immune response.

Within a species not all populations may be migratory; this is known as "partial migration". Partial migration is very common in the southern continents; in Australia, 44% of non-passerine birds and 32% of passerine species are partially migratory. In some species, the population at higher latitudes tends to be migratory and will often winter at lower latitude. The migrating birds bypass the latitudes where other populations may be sedentary, where suitable wintering habitats may already be occupied. This is an example of "leap-frog migration". Many fully migratory species show leap-frog migration (birds that nest at higher latitudes spend the winter at lower latitudes), and many show the alternative, chain migration, where populations 'slide' more evenly north and south without reversing order.

Within a population, it is common for different ages and/or sexes to have different patterns of timing and distance. Female chaffinches "Fringilla coelebs" in Eastern Fennoscandia migrate earlier in the autumn than males do and the European tits of genera "Parus" and "Cyanistes" only migrate their first year.

Most migrations begin with the birds starting off in a broad front. Often, this front narrows into one or more preferred routes termed flyways. These routes typically follow mountain ranges or coastlines, sometimes rivers, and may take advantage of updrafts and other wind patterns or avoid geographical barriers such as large stretches of open water. The specific routes may be genetically programmed or learned to varying degrees. The routes taken on forward and return migration are often different. A common pattern in North America is clockwise migration, where birds flying North tend to be further West, and flying South tend to shift Eastwards.

Many, if not most, birds migrate in flocks. For larger birds, flying in flocks reduces the energy cost. Geese in a V-formation may conserve 12–20% of the energy they would need to fly alone. Red knots "Calidris canutus" and dunlins "Calidris alpina" were found in radar studies to fly faster in flocks than when they were flying alone.
Birds fly at varying altitudes during migration. An expedition to Mt. Everest found skeletons of northern pintail "Anas acuta" and black-tailed godwit "Limosa limosa" at on the Khumbu Glacier. Bar-headed geese "Anser indicus" have been recorded by GPS flying at up to while crossing the Himalayas, at the same time engaging in the highest rates of climb to altitude for any bird. Anecdotal reports of them flying much higher have yet to be corroborated with any direct evidence. Seabirds fly low over water but gain altitude when crossing land, and the reverse pattern is seen in landbirds. However most bird migration is in the range of . Bird strike aviation records from the United States show most collisions occur below and almost none above .

Bird migration is not limited to birds that can fly. Most species of penguin (Spheniscidae) migrate by swimming. These routes can cover over . Dusky grouse "Dendragapus obscurus" perform altitudinal migration mostly by walking. Emus "Dromaius novaehollandiae" in Australia have been observed to undertake long-distance movements on foot during droughts.

While participating in nocturnal migration, many birds give 'Nocturnal Flight Calls', which are short, contact-type calls. These calls likely serve to maintain the composition of a migrating flock, and can sometimes encode the gender of a migrating individual. They also likely serve to avoid collision in the air. Nocturnal migration can also be monitored using weather radar data, which can be used to estimate the number of birds migrating on a given night, as well as the direction of the migration. Future research in this field includes the automatic detection and identification of nocturnally calling migrant birds, which could have broad implications on species conservation and land management.

Nocturnal migrants land in the morning and may feed for a few days before resuming their migration. These birds are referred to as "passage migrants" in the regions where they occur for a short duration between the origin and destination.

Nocturnal migrants minimize depredation, avoid overheating, and can feed during the day. One cost of nocturnal migration is the loss of sleep. Migrants may be able to alter their quality of sleep to compensate for the loss.

The typical image of migration is of northern landbirds, such as swallows (Hirundinidae) and birds of prey, making long flights to the tropics. However, many Holarctic wildfowl and finch (Fringillidae) species winter in the North Temperate Zone, in regions with milder winters than their summer breeding grounds. For example, the pink-footed goose migrates from Iceland to Britain and neighbouring countries, whilst the dark-eyed junco migrates from subarctic and arctic climates to the contiguous United States and the American goldfinch from taiga to wintering grounds extending from the American South northwestward to Western Oregon. Some ducks, such as the garganey "Anas querquedula", move completely or partially into the tropics. The European pied flycatcher "Ficedula hypoleuca" also follows this migratory trend, breeding in Asia and Europe and wintering in Africa.

Migration routes and wintering grounds are both genetically and traditionally determined depending on the social system of the species. In long-lived, social species such as white storks "(Ciconia ciconia)," flocks are often led by the oldest members and young storks learn the route on their first journey. In short-lived species that migrate alone, such as the Eurasian blackcap "Sylvia atricapilla" or the yellow-billed cuckoo "Coccyzus americanus", first-year migrants follow a genetically determined route that is alterable with selective breeding.

Often, the migration route of a long-distance migratory bird doesn't follow a straight line between breeding and wintering grounds. Rather, it could follow a hooked or arched line, with detours around geographical barriers or towards suitable stopover habitat. For most land-birds, such barriers could consist of seas, large water bodies or high mountain ranges, a lack of stopover or feeding sites, or a lack of thermal columns (important for broad-winged birds). Additionally, many migration routes are circuitous due to evolutionary history: the breeding range of Northern wheatears "Oenanthe oenanthe" has expanded to cover the entire Northern Hemisphere, but the species still migrates up to 14,500 km to reach ancestral wintering grounds in sub-Saharan Africa rather than establish new wintering grounds closer to breeding areas.

The same considerations about barriers and detours that apply to long-distance land-bird migration apply to water birds, but in reverse: a large area of land without bodies of water that offer feeding sites may also be a barrier to a bird that feeds in coastal waters. Detours avoiding such barriers are observed: for example, brent geese "Branta bernicla" migrating from the Taymyr Peninsula to the Wadden Sea travel via the White Sea coast and the Baltic Sea rather than directly across the Arctic Ocean and northern Scandinavia.

A similar situation occurs with waders (called "shorebirds" in North America). Many species, such as dunlin "Calidris alpina" and western sandpiper "Calidris mauri", undertake long movements from their Arctic breeding grounds to warmer locations in the same hemisphere, but others such as semipalmated sandpiper "C. pusilla" travel longer distances to the tropics in the Southern Hemisphere.

For some species of waders, migration success depends on the availability of certain key food resources at stopover points along the migration route. This gives the migrants an opportunity to refuel for the next leg of the voyage. Some examples of important stopover locations are the Bay of Fundy and Delaware Bay.

Some bar-tailed godwits "Limosa lapponica" have the longest known non-stop flight of any migrant, flying 11,000 km from Alaska to their New Zealand non-breeding areas. Prior to migration, 55 percent of their bodyweight is stored as fat to fuel this uninterrupted journey.

Seabird migration is similar in pattern to those of the waders and waterfowl. Some, such as the black guillemot "Cepphus grylle" and some gulls, are quite sedentary; others, such as most terns and auks breeding in the temperate northern hemisphere, move varying distances south in the northern winter. The Arctic tern "Sterna paradisaea" has the longest-distance migration of any bird, and sees more daylight than any other, moving from its Arctic breeding grounds to the Antarctic non-breeding areas. One Arctic tern, ringed (banded) as a chick on the Farne Islands off the British east coast, reached Melbourne, Australia in just three months from fledging, a sea journey of over . Many tubenosed birds breed in the southern hemisphere and migrate north in the southern winter.

The most pelagic species, mainly in the 'tubenose' order Procellariiformes, are great wanderers, and the albatrosses of the southern oceans may circle the globe as they ride the "roaring forties" outside the breeding season. The tubenoses spread widely over large areas of open ocean, but congregate when food becomes available. Many are also among the longest-distance migrants; sooty shearwaters "Puffinus griseus" nesting on the Falkland Islands migrate between the breeding colony and the North Atlantic Ocean off Norway. Some Manx shearwaters "Puffinus puffinus" do this same journey in reverse. As they are long-lived birds, they may cover enormous distances during their lives; one record-breaking Manx shearwater is calculated to have flown 8 million km (5 million miles) during its over-50 year lifespan.

Some large broad-winged birds rely on thermal columns of rising hot air to enable them to soar. These include many birds of prey such as vultures, eagles, and buzzards, but also storks. These birds migrate in the daytime. Migratory species in these groups have great difficulty crossing large bodies of water, since thermals only form over land, and these birds cannot maintain active flight for long distances. Mediterranean and other seas present a major obstacle to soaring birds, which must cross at the narrowest points. Massive numbers of large raptors and storks pass through areas such as the Strait of Messina, Gibraltar, Falsterbo, and the Bosphorus at migration times. More common species, such as the European honey buzzard "Pernis apivorus", can be counted in hundreds of thousands in autumn. Other barriers, such as mountain ranges, can also cause funnelling, particularly of large diurnal migrants. This is a notable factor in the Central American migratory bottleneck. Batumi bottleneck in the Caucasus is one of the heaviest migratory funnels on earth. Avoiding flying over the Black Sea surface and across high mountains, hundreds of thousands of soaring birds funnel through an area around the city of Batumi, Georgia. Birds of prey such as honey buzzards which migrate using thermals lose only 10 to 20% of their weight during migration, which may explain why they forage less during migration than do smaller birds of prey with more active flight such as falcons, hawks and harriers.

Many long-distance migrants appear to be genetically programmed to respond to changing day length. Species that move short distances, however, may not need such a timing mechanism, instead moving in response to local weather conditions. Thus mountain and moorland breeders, such as wallcreeper "Tichodroma muraria" and white-throated dipper "Cinclus cinclus", may move only altitudinally to escape the cold higher ground. Other species such as merlin "Falco columbarius" and Eurasian skylark "Alauda arvensis" move further, to the coast or towards the south. Species like the chaffinch are much less migratory in Britain than those of continental Europe, mostly not moving more than 5 km in their lives.

Short-distance passerine migrants have two evolutionary origins. Those that have long-distance migrants in the same family, such as the common chiffchaff "Phylloscopus collybita", are species of southern hemisphere origins that have progressively shortened their return migration to stay in the northern hemisphere.

Species that have no long-distance migratory relatives, such as the waxwings "Bombycilla", are effectively moving in response to winter weather and the loss of their usual winter food, rather than enhanced breeding opportunities.

In the tropics there is little variation in the length of day throughout the year, and it is always warm enough for a food supply, but altitudinal migration occurs in some tropical birds. There is evidence that this enables the migrants to obtain more of their preferred foods such as fruits.

Altitudinal migration is common on mountains worldwide, such as in the Himalayas and the Andes.

Many bird species arid regions across southern Australia are nomadic; they follow water and food supply around the country in an irregular pattern, unrelated to season but related to rainfall. Several years may pass between visits to an area by a particular species.

Sometimes circumstances such as a good breeding season followed by a food source failure the following year lead to irruptions in which large numbers of a species move far beyond the normal range. Bohemian waxwings "Bombycilla garrulus" well show this unpredictable variation in annual numbers, with five major arrivals in Britain during the nineteenth century, but 18 between the years 1937 and 2000. Red crossbills "Loxia curvirostra" too are irruptive, with widespread invasions across England noted in 1251, 1593, 1757, and 1791.

Bird migration is primarily, but not entirely, a Northern Hemisphere phenomenon.
This is because land birds in high northern latitudes, where food becomes scarce in winter, leave for areas further south (including the Southern Hemisphere) to overwinter, and because the continental landmass is much larger in the Northern Hemisphere. In contrast, among (pelagic) seabirds, species of the Southern Hemisphere are more likely to migrate. This is because there is a large area of ocean in the Southern Hemisphere, and more islands suitable for seabirds to nest.

The control of migration, its timing and response are genetically controlled and appear to be a primitive trait that is present even in non-migratory species of birds. The ability to navigate and orient themselves during migration is a much more complex phenomenon that may include both endogenous programs as well as learning.

The primary physiological cue for migration is the changes in the day length. These changes are also related to hormonal changes in the birds. In the period before migration, many birds display higher activity or Zugunruhe (), first described by Johann Friedrich Naumann in 1795, as well as physiological changes such as increased fat deposition. The occurrence of Zugunruhe even in cage-raised birds with no environmental cues (e.g. shortening of day and falling temperature) has pointed to the role of circannual endogenous programs in controlling bird migrations. Caged birds display a preferential flight direction that corresponds with the migratory direction they would take in nature, changing their preferential direction at roughly the same time their wild conspecifics change course.

In polygynous species with considerable sexual dimorphism, males tend to return earlier to the breeding sites than their females. This is termed protandry.

Navigation is based on a variety of senses. Many birds have been shown to use a sun compass. Using the sun for direction involves the need for making compensation based on the time. Navigation has also been shown to be based on a combination of other abilities including the ability to detect magnetic fields (magnetoreception), use visual landmarks as well as olfactory cues.

Long-distance migrants are believed to disperse as young birds and form attachments to potential breeding sites and to favourite wintering sites. Once the site attachment is made they show high site-fidelity, visiting the same wintering sites year after year.

The ability of birds to navigate during migrations cannot be fully explained by endogenous programming, even with the help of responses to environmental cues. The ability to successfully perform long-distance migrations can probably only be fully explained with an accounting for the cognitive ability of the birds to recognize habitats and form mental maps. Satellite tracking of day migrating raptors such as ospreys and honey buzzards has shown that older individuals are better at making corrections for wind drift.
The birds navigate through an innate biological sense resulting from evolution.
Migratory birds may use two electromagnetic tools to find their destinations: one that is entirely innate and another that relies on experience. A young bird on its first migration flies in the correct direction according to the Earth's magnetic field, but does not know how far the journey will be. It does this through a radical pair mechanism whereby chemical reactions in special photo pigments sensitive to short wavelengths are affected by the field. Although this only works during daylight hours, it does not use the position of the sun in any way. At this stage the bird is in the position of a Boy Scout with a compass but no map, until it grows accustomed to the journey and can put its other capabilities to use. With experience it learns various landmarks and this "mapping" is done by magnetites in the trigeminal system, which tell the bird how strong the field is. Because birds migrate between northern and southern regions, the magnetic field strengths at different latitudes let it interpret the radical pair mechanism more accurately and let it know when it has reached its destination. There is a neural connection between the eye and "Cluster N", the part of the forebrain that is active during migrational orientation, suggesting that birds may actually be able to "see" the magnetic field of the earth.

Migrating birds can lose their way and appear outside their normal ranges. This can be due to flying past their destinations as in the "spring overshoot" in which birds returning to their breeding areas overshoot and end up further north than intended. Certain areas, because of their location, have become famous as watchpoints for such birds. Examples are the Point Pelee National Park in Canada, and Spurn in England.

Reverse migration, where the genetic programming of young birds fails to work properly, can lead to rarities turning up as vagrants thousands of kilometres out of range.

Drift migration of birds blown off course by the wind can result in "falls" of large numbers of migrants at coastal sites.

A related phenomenon called "abmigration" involves birds from one region joining similar birds from a different breeding region in the common winter grounds and then migrating back along with the new population. This is especially common in some waterfowl, which shift from one flyway to another.

It has been possible to teach a migration route to a flock of birds, for example in re-introduction schemes. After a trial with Canada geese "Branta canadensis", microlight aircraft were used in the US to teach safe migration routes to reintroduced whooping cranes "Grus americana".

Birds need to alter their metabolism to meet the demands of migration. The storage of energy through the accumulation of fat and the control of sleep in nocturnal migrants require special physiological adaptations. In addition, the feathers of a bird suffer from wear-and-tear and require to be moulted. The timing of this moult – usually once a year but sometimes twice – varies with some species moulting prior to moving to their winter grounds and others molting prior to returning to their breeding grounds. Apart from physiological adaptations, migration sometimes requires behavioural changes such as flying in flocks to reduce the energy used in migration or the risk of predation.

Migration in birds is highly labile and is believed to have developed independently in many avian lineages. While it is agreed that the behavioral and physiological adaptations necessary for migration are under genetic control, some authors have argued that no genetic change is necessary for migratory behavior to develop in a sedentary species because the genetic framework for migratory behavior exists in nearly all avian lineages. This explains the rapid appearance of migratory behavior after the most recent glacial maximum.

Theoretical analyses show that detours that increase flight distance by up to 20% will often be adaptive on aerodynamic grounds – a bird that loads itself with food to cross a long barrier flies less efficiently. However some species show circuitous migratory routes that reflect historical range expansions and are far from optimal in ecological terms. An example is the migration of continental populations of Swainson's thrush "Catharus ustulatus", which fly far east across North America before turning south via Florida to reach northern South America; this route is believed to be the consequence of a range expansion that occurred about 10,000 years ago. Detours may also be caused by differential wind conditions, predation risk, or other factors.

Large scale climatic changes are expected to have an effect on the timing of migration. Studies have shown a variety of effects including timing changes in migration, breeding as well as population declines. Many species have been expanding their range as a likely consequence of climate change. This is sometimes in the form of former vagrants becoming established or regular migrants. Currently legislation and protection mechanisms have been slow to recognise the concept of range-shifts from climate refugee birds.

The migration of birds also aids the movement of other species, including those of ectoparasites such as ticks and lice, which in turn may carry micro-organisms including those of concern to human health. Due to the global spread of avian influenza, bird migration has been studied as a possible mechanism of disease transmission, but it has been found not to present a special risk; import of pet and domestic birds is a greater threat. Some viruses that are maintained in birds without lethal effects, such as the West Nile virus may however be spread by migrating birds. Birds may also have a role in the dispersal of propagules of plants and plankton.

Some predators take advantage of the concentration of birds during migration. Greater noctule bats feed on nocturnal migrating passerines. Some birds of prey specialize on migrating waders.

Early studies on the timing of migration began in 1749 in Finland, with Johannes Leche of Turku collecting the dates of arrivals of spring migrants.

Bird migration routes have been studied by a variety of techniques including the oldest, marking. Swans have been marked with a nick on the beak since about 1560 in England. Scientific ringing was pioneered by Hans Christian Cornelius Mortensen in 1899. Other techniques include radar and satellite tracking. The rate of bird migration over the Alps (up to a height of 150 m) was found to be highly comparable between fixed-beam radar measurements and visual bird counts, highlighting the potential use of this technique as an objective way of quantifying bird migration.

Stable isotopes of hydrogen, oxygen, carbon, nitrogen, and sulphur can establish avian migratory connectivity between wintering sites and breeding grounds. Stable isotopic methods to establish migratory linkage rely on spatial isotopic differences in bird diet that are incorporated into inert tissues like feathers, or into growing tissues such as claws and muscle or blood.

An approach to identify migration intensity makes use of upward pointing microphones to record the nocturnal contact calls of flocks flying overhead. These are then analyzed in a laboratory to measure time, frequency and species.
An older technique developed by George Lowery and others to quantify migration involves observing the face of the full moon with a telescope and counting the silhouettes of flocks of birds as they fly at night.

Orientation behaviour studies have been traditionally carried out using variants of a setup known as the Emlen funnel, which consists of a circular cage with the top covered by glass or wire-screen so that either the sky is visible or the setup is placed in a planetarium or with other controls on environmental cues. The orientation behaviour of the bird inside the cage is studied quantitatively using the distribution of marks that the bird leaves on the walls of the cage. Other approaches used in pigeon homing studies make use of the direction in which the bird vanishes on the horizon.

Human activities have threatened many migratory bird species. The distances involved in bird migration mean that they often cross political boundaries of countries and conservation measures require international cooperation. Several international treaties have been signed to protect migratory species including the Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918 of the US. and the African-Eurasian Migratory Waterbird Agreement

The concentration of birds during migration can put species at risk. Some spectacular migrants have already gone extinct; during the passenger pigeon's ("Ectopistes migratorius") migration the enormous flocks were a mile (1.6 km) wide, darkening the sky and long, taking several days to pass.

Other significant areas include stop-over sites between the wintering and breeding territories. A capture-recapture study of passerine migrants with high fidelity for breeding and wintering sites did not show similar strict association with stop-over sites.

Hunting along migration routes threatens some bird species. The populations of Siberian cranes ("Leucogeranus leucogeranus") that wintered in India declined due to hunting along the route, particularly in Afghanistan and Central Asia. Birds were last seen in their favourite wintering grounds in Keoladeo National Park in 2002. Structures such as power lines, wind farms and offshore oil-rigs have also been known to affect migratory birds. Other migration hazards include pollution, storms, wildfires, and habitat destruction along migration routes, denying migrants food at stopover points. For example, in the East Asian–Australasian Flyway, up to 65% of key intertidal habitat at the Yellow Sea migration bottleneck has been destroyed since the 1950s.






</doc>
<doc id="3410" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=3410" title="Bird">
Bird

Birds are a group of warm-blooded vertebrates constituting the class Aves, characterized by feathers, toothless beaked jaws, the laying of hard-shelled eggs, a high metabolic rate, a four-chambered heart, and a strong yet lightweight skeleton. Birds live worldwide and range in size from the bee hummingbird to the ostrich. There are about ten thousand living species, more than half of which are passerine, or "perching" birds. Birds have whose development varies according to species; the only known groups without wings are the extinct moa and elephant birds. Wings, which evolved from forelimbs, gave birds the ability to fly, although further evolution has led to the loss of flight in some birds, including ratites, penguins, and diverse endemic island species. The digestive and respiratory systems of birds are also uniquely adapted for flight. Some bird species of aquatic environments, particularly seabirds and some waterbirds, have further evolved for swimming.

Birds are a group of feathered theropod dinosaurs, and constitute the only living dinosaurs, and thus are reptiles. Likewise, the closest living relatives of birds are the crocodilians. Birds are descendants of the primitive avialans (whose members include "Archaeopteryx") which first appeared about 160 million years ago (mya) in China. According to DNA evidence, modern birds (Neornithes) evolved in the Middle to Late Cretaceous, and diversified dramatically around the time of the Cretaceous–Paleogene extinction event 66 mya, which killed off the pterosaurs and all non-avian dinosaurs.

Many social species pass on knowledge across generations, which is considered a form of culture. Birds are social, communicating with visual signals, calls, and songs, and participating in such behaviours as cooperative breeding and hunting, flocking, and mobbing of predators. The vast majority of bird species are socially (but not necessarily sexually) monogamous, usually for one breeding season at a time, sometimes for years, but rarely for life. Other species have breeding systems that are polygynous (one male with many females) or, rarely, polyandrous (one female with many males). Birds produce offspring by laying eggs which are fertilised through sexual reproduction. They are usually laid in a nest and incubated by the parents. Most birds have an extended period of parental care after hatching.

Many species of birds are economically important as food for human consumption and raw material in manufacturing, with domesticated and undomesticated birds being important sources of eggs, meat, and feathers. Songbirds, parrots, and other species are popular as pets. Guano (bird excrement) is harvested for use as a fertiliser. Birds figure throughout human culture. About 120 to 130 species have become extinct due to human activity since the 17th century, and hundreds more before then. Human activity threatens about 1,200 bird species with extinction, though efforts are underway to protect them. Recreational birdwatching is an important part of the ecotourism industry.

The first classification of birds was developed by Francis Willughby and John Ray in their 1676 volume "Ornithologiae".
Carl Linnaeus modified that work in 1758 to devise the taxonomic classification system currently in use. Birds are categorised as the biological class Aves in Linnaean taxonomy. Phylogenetic taxonomy places Aves in the dinosaur clade Theropoda.

Aves and a sister group, the order Crocodilia, contain the only living representatives of the reptile clade Archosauria. During the late 1990s, Aves was most commonly defined phylogenetically as all descendants of the most recent common ancestor of modern birds and "Archaeopteryx lithographica". However, an earlier definition proposed by Jacques Gauthier gained wide currency in the 21st century, and is used by many scientists including adherents of the Phylocode system. Gauthier defined Aves to include only the crown group of the set of modern birds. This was done by excluding most groups known only from fossils, and assigning them, instead, to the Avialae, in part to avoid the uncertainties about the placement of "Archaeopteryx" in relation to animals traditionally thought of as theropod dinosaurs.

Gauthier identified four different definitions for the same biological name "Aves", which is a problem. Gauthier proposed to reserve the term Aves only for the crown group consisting of the last common ancestor of all living birds and all of its descendants, which corresponds to meaning number 4 below. He assigned other names to the other groups.


Under the fourth definition "Archaeopteryx" is an avialan, and not a member of Aves. Gauthier's proposals have been adopted by many researchers in the field of palaeontology and bird evolution, though the exact definitions applied have been inconsistent. Avialae, initially proposed to replace the traditional fossil content of Aves, is often used synonymously with the vernacular term "bird" by these researchers.

Most researchers define Avialae as branch-based clade, though definitions vary. Many authors have used a definition similar to "all theropods closer to birds than to "Deinonychus"." Avialae is also occasionally defined as an apomorphy-based clade (that is, one based on physical characteristics). Jacques Gauthier, who named Avialae in 1986, re-defined it in 2001 as all dinosaurs that possessed feathered wings used in flapping flight, and the birds that descended from them.

Based on fossil and biological evidence, most scientists accept that birds are a specialised subgroup of theropod dinosaurs, and more specifically, they are members of Maniraptora, a group of theropods which includes dromaeosaurs and oviraptorids, among others. As scientists have discovered more theropods closely related to birds, the previously clear distinction between non-birds and birds has become blurred. Recent discoveries in the Liaoning Province of northeast China, which demonstrate many small theropod feathered dinosaurs, contribute to this ambiguity.

The consensus view in contemporary palaeontology is that the flying theropods, or avialans, are the closest relatives of the deinonychosaurs, which include dromaeosaurids and troodontids. Together, these form a group called Paraves. Some basal members of this group, such as "Microraptor", have features which may have enabled them to glide or fly. The most basal deinonychosaurs were very small. This evidence raises the possibility that the ancestor of all paravians may have been arboreal, have been able to glide, or both. Unlike "Archaeopteryx" and the non-avialan feathered dinosaurs, who primarily ate meat, recent studies suggest that the first avialans were omnivores.

The Late Jurassic "Archaeopteryx" is well known as one of the first transitional fossils to be found, and it provided support for the theory of evolution in the late 19th century. "Archaeopteryx" was the first fossil to display both clearly traditional reptilian characteristics—teeth, clawed fingers, and a long, lizard-like tail—as well as wings with flight feathers similar to those of modern birds. It is not considered a direct ancestor of birds, though it is possibly closely related to the true ancestor.

The earliest known avialan fossils come from the Tiaojishan Formation of China, which has been dated to the late Jurassic period (Oxfordian stage), about 160 million years ago. The avialan species from this time period include "Anchiornis huxleyi", "Xiaotingia zhengi", and "Aurornis xui".

The well-known early avialan, "Archaeopteryx", dates from slightly later Jurassic rocks (about 155 million years old) from Germany. Many of these early avialans shared unusual anatomical features that may be ancestral to modern birds, but were later lost during bird evolution. These features include enlarged claws on the second toe which may have been held clear of the ground in life, and long feathers or "hind wings" covering the hind limbs and feet, which may have been used in aerial maneuvering.

Avialans diversified into a wide variety of forms during the Cretaceous Period. Many groups retained primitive characteristics, such as clawed wings and teeth, though the latter were lost independently in a number of avialan groups, including modern birds (Aves). While the earliest forms, such as "Archaeopteryx" and "Jeholornis", retained the long bony tails of their ancestors, the tails of more advanced avialans were shortened with the advent of the pygostyle bone in the group Pygostylia. In the late Cretaceous, about 100 million years ago, the ancestors of all modern birds evolved a more open pelvis, allowing them to lay larger eggs compared to body size.
Around 95 million years ago, they evolved a better sense of smell.

The first large, diverse lineage of short-tailed avialans to evolve were the enantiornithes, or "opposite birds", so named because the construction of their shoulder bones was in reverse to that of modern birds. Enantiornithes occupied a wide array of ecological niches, from sand-probing shorebirds and fish-eaters to tree-dwelling forms and seed-eaters. While they were the dominant group of avialans during the Cretaceous period, enantiornithes became extinct along with many other dinosaur groups at the end of the Mesozoic era.

Many species of the second major avialan lineage to diversify, the Euornithes (meaning "true birds", because they include the ancestors of modern birds), were semi-aquatic and specialised in eating fish and other small aquatic organisms. Unlike the enantiornithes, which dominated land-based and arboreal habitats, most early euornithes lacked perching adaptations and seem to have included shorebird-like species, waders, and swimming and diving species.

The latter included the superficially gull-like "Ichthyornis" and the Hesperornithiformes, which became so well adapted to hunting fish in marine environments that they lost the ability to fly and became primarily aquatic. The early euornithes also saw the development of many traits associated with modern birds, like strongly keeled breastbones, toothless, beaked portions of their jaws (though most non-avian euornithes retained teeth in other parts of the jaws). Euornithes also included the first avialans to develop true pygostyle and a fully mobile fan of tail feathers, which may have replaced the "hind wing" as the primary mode of aerial maneuverability and braking in flight.

A study on mosaic evolution in the avian skull found that the last common ancestor of all neornithes might have had a beak similar to that of the modern hook-billed vanga and a skull similar to that of the Eurasian golden oriole. As both species are small aerial and canopy foraging omnivores, a similar ecological niche was inferred for this hypothetical ancestor.

All modern birds lie within the crown group Aves (alternately Neornithes), which has two subdivisions: the Palaeognathae, which includes the flightless ratites (such as the ostriches) and the weak-flying tinamous, and the extremely diverse Neognathae, containing all other birds. These two subdivisions are often given the rank of superorder, although Livezey and Zusi assigned them "cohort" rank. Depending on the taxonomic viewpoint, the number of known living bird species varies anywhere from 9,800 to 10,758.

The discovery of "Vegavis", a late Cretaceous member of the Anatidae, proved that the diversification of modern birds started before the Cenozoic era. The affinities of an earlier fossil, the possible galliform "Austinornis lentus", dated to about 85 million years ago, are still too controversial to provide a fossil evidence of modern bird diversification.

Most studies agree on a Cretaceous age for the most recent common ancestor of modern birds but estimates range from the Middle Cretaceous to the latest Late Cretaceous. Similarly, there is no agreement on whether most of the early diversification of modern birds occurred before or after the Cretaceous–Palaeogene extinction event. This disagreement is in part caused by a divergence in the evidence; most molecular dating studies suggests a Cretaceous evolutionary radiation, while fossil evidence points to a Cenozoic radiation (the so-called 'rocks' versus 'clocks' controversy). Previous attempts to reconcile molecular and fossil evidence have proved controversial, but more recent estimates, using a more comprehensive sample of fossils and a new way of calibrating molecular clocks, showed that while modern birds originated early in the Late Cretaceous, a pulse of diversification in all major groups occurred around the Cretaceous–Palaeogene extinction event.

Cladogram of modern bird relationships based on Prum, R.O. "et al". (2015) with some clade names after Yuri, T. et al. (2013).

The classification of birds is a contentious issue. Sibley and Ahlquist's "Phylogeny and Classification of Birds" (1990) is a landmark work on the classification of birds, although it is frequently debated and constantly revised. Most evidence seems to suggest the assignment of orders is accurate, but scientists disagree about the relationships between the orders themselves; evidence from modern bird anatomy, fossils and DNA have all been brought to bear on the problem, but no strong consensus has emerged. More recently, new fossil and molecular evidence is providing an increasingly clear picture of the evolution of modern bird orders.

Birds live and breed in most terrestrial habitats and on all seven continents, reaching their southern extreme in the snow petrel's breeding colonies up to inland in Antarctica. The highest bird diversity occurs in tropical regions. It was earlier thought that this high diversity was the result of higher speciation rates in the tropics; however recent studies found higher speciation rates in the high latitudes that were offset by greater extinction rates than in the tropics. Many species migrate annually over great distances and across oceans; several families of birds have adapted to life both on the world's oceans and in them, and some seabird species come ashore only to breed, while some penguins have been recorded diving up to deep.

Many bird species have established breeding populations in areas to which they have been introduced by humans. Some of these introductions have been deliberate; the ring-necked pheasant, for example, has been introduced around the world as a game bird. Others have been accidental, such as the establishment of wild monk parakeets in several North American cities after their escape from captivity. Some species, including cattle egret, yellow-headed caracara and galah, have spread naturally far beyond their original ranges as agricultural practices created suitable new habitat.

Compared with other vertebrates, birds have a body plan that shows many unusual adaptations, mostly to facilitate flight.

The skeleton consists of very lightweight bones. They have large air-filled cavities (called pneumatic cavities) which connect with the respiratory system. The skull bones in adults are fused and do not show cranial sutures. The orbits are large and separated by a bony septum. The spine has cervical, thoracic, lumbar and caudal regions with the number of cervical (neck) vertebrae highly variable and especially flexible, but movement is reduced in the anterior thoracic vertebrae and absent in the later vertebrae. The last few are fused with the pelvis to form the synsacrum. The ribs are flattened and the sternum is keeled for the attachment of flight muscles except in the flightless bird orders. The forelimbs are modified into wings. The wings are more or less developed depending on the species; the only known groups that lost their wings are the extinct moa and elephant birds.

Like the reptiles, birds are primarily uricotelic, that is, their kidneys extract nitrogenous waste from their bloodstream and excrete it as uric acid, instead of urea or ammonia, through the ureters into the intestine. Birds do not have a urinary bladder or external urethral opening and (with exception of the ostrich) uric acid is excreted along with faeces as a semisolid waste. However, birds such as hummingbirds can be facultatively ammonotelic, excreting most of the nitrogenous wastes as ammonia. They also excrete creatine, rather than creatinine like mammals. This material, as well as the output of the intestines, emerges from the bird's cloaca. The cloaca is a multi-purpose opening: waste is expelled through it, most birds mate by joining cloaca, and females lay eggs from it. In addition, many species of birds regurgitate pellets.

Males within Palaeognathae (with the exception of the kiwis), the Anseriformes (with the exception of screamers), and in rudimentary forms in Galliformes (but fully developed in Cracidae) possess a penis, which is never present in Neoaves. The length is thought to be related to sperm competition. When not copulating, it is hidden within the proctodeum compartment within the cloaca, just inside the vent.

The digestive system of birds is unique, with a crop for storage and a gizzard that contains swallowed stones for grinding food to compensate for the lack of teeth. Most birds are highly adapted for rapid digestion to aid with flight. Some migratory birds have adapted to use protein stored in many parts of their bodies, including protein from the intestines, as additional energy during migration.

Birds have one of the most complex respiratory systems of all animal groups. Upon inhalation, 75% of the fresh air bypasses the lungs and flows directly into a posterior air sac which extends from the lungs and connects with air spaces in the bones and fills them with air. The other 25% of the air goes directly into the lungs. When the bird exhales, the used air flows out of the lungs and the stored fresh air from the posterior air sac is simultaneously forced into the lungs. Thus, a bird's lungs receive a constant supply of fresh air during both inhalation and exhalation. Sound production is achieved using the syrinx, a muscular chamber incorporating multiple tympanic membranes which diverges from the lower end of the trachea; the trachea being elongated in some species, increasing the volume of vocalisations and the perception of the bird's size.

In birds, the main arteries taking blood away from the heart originate from the right aortic arch (or pharyngeal arch), unlike in the mammals where the left aortic arch forms this part of the aorta. The postcava receives blood from the limbs via the renal portal system. Unlike in mammals, the circulating red blood cells in birds retain their nucleus.

The avian circulatory system is driven by a four-chambered, myogenic heart contained in a fibrous pericardial sac. This pericardial sac is filled with a serous fluid for lubrication. The heart itself is divided into a right and left half, each with an atrium and ventricle. The atrium and ventricles of each side are separated by atrioventricular valves which prevent back flow from one chamber to the next during contraction. Being myogenic, the heart's pace is maintained by pacemaker cells found in the sinoatrial node, located on the right atrium.

The sinoatrial node uses calcium to cause a depolarising signal transduction pathway from the atrium through right and left atrioventricular bundle which communicates contraction to the ventricles. The avian heart also consists of muscular arches that are made up of thick bundles of muscular layers. Much like a mammalian heart, the avian heart is composed of endocardial, myocardial and epicardial layers. The atrium walls tend to be thinner than the ventricle walls, due to the intense ventricular contraction used to pump oxygenated blood throughout the body. Avian hearts are generally larger than mammalian hearts when compared to body mass. This adaptation allows more blood to be pumped to meet the high metabolic need associated with flight.

Birds have a very efficient system for diffusing oxygen into the blood; birds have a ten times greater surface area to gas exchange volume than mammals. As a result, birds have more blood in their capillaries per unit of volume of lung than a mammal. The arteries are composed of thick elastic muscles to withstand the pressure of the ventricular contractions, and become more rigid as they move away from the heart. Blood moves through the arteries, which undergo vasoconstriction, and into arterioles which act as a transportation system to distribute primarily oxygen as well as nutrients to all tissues of the body. As the arterioles move away from the heart and into individual organs and tissues they are further divided to increase surface area and slow blood flow. Blood travels through the arterioles and moves into the capillaries where gas exchange can occur.

Capillaries are organized into capillary beds in tissues; it is here that blood exchanges oxygen for carbon dioxide waste. In the capillary beds, blood flow is slowed to allow maximum diffusion of oxygen into the tissues. Once the blood has become deoxygenated, it travels through venules then veins and back to the heart. Veins, unlike arteries, are thin and rigid as they do not need to withstand extreme pressure. As blood travels through the venules to the veins a funneling occurs called vasodilation bringing blood back to the heart. Once the blood reaches the heart, it moves first into the right atrium, then the right ventricle to be pumped through the lungs for further gas exchange of carbon dioxide waste for oxygen. Oxygenated blood then flows from the lungs through the left atrium to the left ventricle where it is pumped out to the body.

The nervous system is large relative to the bird's size. The most developed part of the brain is the one that controls the flight-related functions, while the cerebellum coordinates movement and the cerebrum controls behaviour patterns, navigation, mating and nest building. Most birds have a poor sense of smell with notable exceptions including kiwis, New World vultures and tubenoses. The avian visual system is usually highly developed. Water birds have special flexible lenses, allowing accommodation for vision in air and water. Some species also have dual fovea. Birds are tetrachromatic, possessing ultraviolet (UV) sensitive cone cells in the eye as well as green, red and blue ones. They also have double cones, likely to mediate achromatic vision.

Many birds show plumage patterns in ultraviolet that are invisible to the human eye; some birds whose sexes appear similar to the naked eye are distinguished by the presence of ultraviolet reflective patches on their feathers. Male blue tits have an ultraviolet reflective crown patch which is displayed in courtship by posturing and raising of their nape feathers. Ultraviolet light is also used in foraging—kestrels have been shown to search for prey by detecting the UV reflective urine trail marks left on the ground by rodents. With the exception of pigeons and a few other species, the eyelids of birds are not used in blinking. Instead the eye is lubricated by the nictitating membrane, a third eyelid that moves horizontally. The nictitating membrane also covers the eye and acts as a contact lens in many aquatic birds. The bird retina has a fan shaped blood supply system called the pecten.

Most birds cannot move their eyes, although there are exceptions, such as the great cormorant. Birds with eyes on the sides of their heads have a wide visual field, while birds with eyes on the front of their heads, such as owls, have binocular vision and can estimate the depth of field. The avian ear lacks external pinnae but is covered by feathers, although in some birds, such as the "Asio", "Bubo" and "Otus" owls, these feathers form tufts which resemble ears. The inner ear has a cochlea, but it is not spiral as in mammals.

A few species are able to use chemical defences against predators; some Procellariiformes can eject an unpleasant stomach oil against an aggressor, and some species of pitohuis from New Guinea have a powerful neurotoxin in their skin and feathers.

A lack of field observations limit our knowledge, but intraspecific conflicts are known to sometimes result in injury or death. The screamers (Anhimidae), some jacanas ("Jacana", "Hydrophasianus"), the spur-winged goose ("Plectropterus"), the torrent duck ("Merganetta") and nine species of lapwing ("Vanellus") use a sharp spur on the wing as a weapon. The steamer ducks ("Tachyeres"), geese and swans ("Anserinae"), the solitaire ("Pezophaps"), sheathbills ("Chionis"), some guans ("Crax") and stone curlews ("Burhinus") use a bony knob on the alular metacarpal to punch and hammer opponents. The jacanas "Actophilornis" and "Irediparra" have an expanded, blade-like radius. The extinct "Xenicibis" was unique in having an elongate forelimb and massive hand which likely functioned in combat or defence as a jointed club or flail. Swans, for instance, may strike with the bony spurs and bite when defending eggs or young.

Birds have two sexes: either female or male. The sex of birds is determined by the Z and W sex chromosomes, rather than by the X and Y chromosomes present in mammals. Male birds have two Z chromosomes (ZZ), and female birds have a W chromosome and a Z chromosome (WZ).

In nearly all species of birds, an individual's sex is determined at fertilisation. However, one recent study claimed to demonstrate temperature-dependent sex determination among the Australian brushturkey, for which higher temperatures during incubation resulted in a higher female-to-male sex ratio. This, however, was later proven to not be the case. These birds do not exhibit temperature-dependent sex determination, but temperature-dependent sex mortality.

Feathers are a feature characteristic of birds (though also present in some dinosaurs not currently considered to be true birds). They facilitate flight, provide insulation that aids in thermoregulation, and are used in display, camouflage, and signalling. There are several types of feathers, each serving its own set of purposes. Feathers are epidermal growths attached to the skin and arise only in specific tracts of skin called pterylae. The distribution pattern of these feather tracts (pterylosis) is used in taxonomy and systematics. The arrangement and appearance of feathers on the body, called plumage, may vary within species by age, social status, and sex.

Plumage is regularly moulted; the standard plumage of a bird that has moulted after breeding is known as the "" plumage, or—in the Humphrey–Parkes terminology—"basic" plumage; breeding plumages or variations of the basic plumage are known under the Humphrey–Parkes system as "" plumages. Moulting is annual in most species, although some may have two moults a year, and large birds of prey may moult only once every few years. Moulting patterns vary across species. In passerines, flight feathers are replaced one at a time with the innermost being the first. When the fifth of sixth primary is replaced, the outermost begin to drop. After the innermost tertiaries are moulted, the starting from the innermost begin to drop and this proceeds to the outer feathers (centrifugal moult). The greater primary are moulted in synchrony with the primary that they overlap.

A small number of species, such as ducks and geese, lose all of their flight feathers at once, temporarily becoming flightless. As a general rule, the tail feathers are moulted and replaced starting with the innermost pair. Centripetal moults of tail feathers are however seen in the Phasianidae. The centrifugal moult is modified in the tail feathers of woodpeckers and treecreepers, in that it begins with the second innermost pair of feathers and finishes with the central pair of feathers so that the bird maintains a functional climbing tail. The general pattern seen in passerines is that the primaries are replaced outward, secondaries inward, and the tail from centre outward. Before nesting, the females of most bird species gain a bare brood patch by losing feathers close to the belly. The skin there is well supplied with blood vessels and helps the bird in incubation.

Feathers require maintenance and birds preen or groom them daily, spending an average of around 9% of their daily time on this. The bill is used to brush away foreign particles and to apply waxy secretions from the uropygial gland; these secretions protect the feathers' flexibility and act as an antimicrobial agent, inhibiting the growth of feather-degrading bacteria. This may be supplemented with the secretions of formic acid from ants, which birds receive through a behaviour known as anting, to remove feather parasites.

The scales of birds are composed of the same keratin as beaks, claws, and spurs. They are found mainly on the toes and metatarsus, but may be found further up on the ankle in some birds. Most bird scales do not overlap significantly, except in the cases of kingfishers and woodpeckers.
The scales of birds are thought to be homologous to those of reptiles and mammals.

Most birds can fly, which distinguishes them from almost all other vertebrate classes. Flight is the primary means of locomotion for most bird species and is used for searching for food and for escaping from predators. Birds have various adaptations for flight, including a lightweight skeleton, two large flight muscles, the pectoralis (which accounts for 15% of the total mass of the bird) and the supracoracoideus, as well as a modified forelimb (wing) that serves as an aerofoil.

Wing shape and size generally determine a bird's flight style and performance; many birds combine powered, flapping flight with less energy-intensive soaring flight. About 60 extant bird species are flightless, as were many extinct birds. Flightlessness often arises in birds on isolated islands, probably due to limited resources and the absence of land predators. Although flightless, penguins use similar musculature and movements to "fly" through the water, as do some flight-capable birds such as auks, shearwaters and dippers.
Most birds are diurnal, but some birds, such as many species of owls and nightjars, are nocturnal or crepuscular (active during twilight hours), and many coastal waders feed when the tides are appropriate, by day or night.

 are varied and often include nectar, fruit, plants, seeds, carrion, and various small animals, including other birds. Because birds have no teeth, their digestive system is adapted to process unmasticated food items that are swallowed whole.

Birds that employ many strategies to obtain food or feed on a variety of food items are called generalists, while others that concentrate time and effort on specific food items or have a single strategy to obtain food are considered specialists. Birds' feeding strategies vary by species. Many birds glean for insects, invertebrates, fruit, or seeds. Some hunt insects by suddenly attacking from a branch. Those species that seek pest insects are considered beneficial 'biological control agents' and their presence encouraged in biological pest control programmes. Combined, insectivorous birds eat 400–500 million metric tons of arthropods annually.

Nectar feeders such as hummingbirds, sunbirds, lories, and lorikeets amongst others have specially adapted brushy tongues and in many cases bills designed to fit co-adapted flowers. Kiwis and shorebirds with long bills probe for invertebrates; shorebirds' varied bill lengths and feeding methods result in the separation of ecological niches. Loons, diving ducks, penguins and auks pursue their prey underwater, using their wings or feet for propulsion, while aerial predators such as sulids, kingfishers and terns plunge dive after their prey. Flamingos, three species of prion, and some ducks are filter feeders. Geese and dabbling ducks are primarily grazers.

Some species, including frigatebirds, gulls, and skuas, engage in kleptoparasitism, stealing food items from other birds. Kleptoparasitism is thought to be a supplement to food obtained by hunting, rather than a significant part of any species' diet; a study of great frigatebirds stealing from masked boobies estimated that the frigatebirds stole at most 40% of their food and on average stole only 5%. Other birds are scavengers; some of these, like vultures, are specialised carrion eaters, while others, like gulls, corvids, or other birds of prey, are opportunists.

Water is needed by many birds although their mode of excretion and lack of sweat glands reduces the physiological demands. Some desert birds can obtain their water needs entirely from moisture in their food. They may also have other adaptations such as allowing their body temperature to rise, saving on moisture loss from evaporative cooling or panting. Seabirds can drink seawater and have salt glands inside the head that eliminate excess salt out of the nostrils.

Most birds scoop water in their beaks and raise their head to let water run down the throat. Some species, especially of arid zones, belonging to the pigeon, finch, mousebird, button-quail and bustard families are capable of sucking up water without the need to tilt back their heads. Some desert birds depend on water sources and sandgrouse are particularly well known for their daily congregations at waterholes. Nesting sandgrouse and many plovers carry water to their young by wetting their belly feathers. Some birds carry water for chicks at the nest in their crop or regurgitate it along with food. The pigeon family, flamingos and penguins have adaptations to produce a nutritive fluid called crop milk that they provide to their chicks.

Feathers being critical to the survival of a bird, require maintenance. Apart from physical wear and tear, feathers face the onslaught of fungi, ectoparasitic feather mites and bird lice. The physical condition of feathers are maintained by often with the application of secretions from the . Birds also bathe in water or dust themselves. While some birds dip into shallow water, more aerial species may make aerial dips into water and arboreal species often make use of dew or rain that collect on leaves. Birds of arid regions make use of loose soil to dust-bathe. A behaviour termed as anting in which the bird encourages ants to run through their plumage is also thought to help them reduce the ectoparasite load in feathers. Many species will spread out their wings and expose them to direct sunlight and this too is thought to help in reducing fungal and ectoparasitic activity that may lead to feather damage.

Many bird species migrate to take advantage of global differences of seasonal temperatures, therefore optimising availability of food sources and breeding habitat. These migrations vary among the different groups. Many landbirds, shorebirds, and waterbirds undertake annual long-distance migrations, usually triggered by the length of daylight as well as weather conditions. These birds are characterised by a breeding season spent in the temperate or polar regions and a non-breeding season in the tropical regions or opposite hemisphere. Before migration, birds substantially increase body fats and reserves and reduce the size of some of their organs.

Migration is highly demanding energetically, particularly as birds need to cross deserts and oceans without refuelling. Landbirds have a flight range of around and shorebirds can fly up to , although the bar-tailed godwit is capable of non-stop flights of up to . Seabirds also undertake long migrations, the longest annual migration being those of sooty shearwaters, which nest in New Zealand and Chile and spend the northern summer feeding in the North Pacific off Japan, Alaska and California, an annual round trip of . Other seabirds disperse after breeding, travelling widely but having no set migration route. Albatrosses nesting in the Southern Ocean often undertake circumpolar trips between breeding seasons.
Some bird species undertake shorter migrations, travelling only as far as is required to avoid bad weather or obtain food. Irruptive species such as the boreal finches are one such group and can commonly be found at a location in one year and absent the next. This type of migration is normally associated with food availability. Species may also travel shorter distances over part of their range, with individuals from higher latitudes travelling into the existing range of conspecifics; others undertake partial migrations, where only a fraction of the population, usually females and subdominant males, migrates. Partial migration can form a large percentage of the migration behaviour of birds in some regions; in Australia, surveys found that 44% of non-passerine birds and 32% of passerines were partially migratory.

Altitudinal migration is a form of short-distance migration in which birds spend the breeding season at higher altitudes and move to lower ones during suboptimal conditions. It is most often triggered by temperature changes and usually occurs when the normal territories also become inhospitable due to lack of food. Some species may also be nomadic, holding no fixed territory and moving according to weather and food availability. Parrots as a family are overwhelmingly neither migratory nor sedentary but considered to either be dispersive, irruptive, nomadic or undertake small and irregular migrations.

The ability of birds to return to precise locations across vast distances has been known for some time; in an experiment conducted in the 1950s, a Manx shearwater released in Boston in the United States returned to its colony in Skomer, in Wales within 13 days, a distance of . Birds navigate during migration using a variety of methods. For diurnal migrants, the sun is used to navigate by day, and a stellar compass is used at night. Birds that use the sun compensate for the changing position of the sun during the day by the use of an internal clock. Orientation with the stellar compass depends on the position of the constellations surrounding Polaris. These are backed up in some species by their ability to sense the Earth's geomagnetism through specialised photoreceptors.

Birds communicate using primarily visual and auditory signals. Signals can be interspecific (between species) and intraspecific (within species).

Birds sometimes use plumage to assess and assert social dominance, to display breeding condition in sexually selected species, or to make threatening displays, as in the sunbittern's mimicry of a large predator to ward off hawks and protect young chicks. Variation in plumage also allows for the identification of birds, particularly between species.

Visual communication among birds may also involve ritualised displays, which have developed from non-signalling actions such as preening, the adjustments of feather position, pecking, or other behaviour. These displays may signal aggression or submission or may contribute to the formation of pair-bonds. The most elaborate displays occur during courtship, where "dances" are often formed from complex combinations of many possible component movements; males' breeding success may depend on the quality of such displays.

Bird calls and songs, which are produced in the syrinx, are the major means by which birds communicate with sound. This communication can be very complex; some species can operate the two sides of the syrinx independently, allowing the simultaneous production of two different songs.
Calls are used for a variety of purposes, including mate attraction, evaluation of potential mates, bond formation, the claiming and maintenance of territories, the identification of other individuals (such as when parents look for chicks in colonies or when mates reunite at the start of breeding season), and the warning of other birds of potential predators, sometimes with specific information about the nature of the threat. Some birds also use mechanical sounds for auditory communication. The "Coenocorypha" snipes of New Zealand drive air through their feathers, woodpeckers drum for long-distance communication, and palm cockatoos use tools to drum.

While some birds are essentially territorial or live in small family groups, other birds may form large flocks. The principal benefits of flocking are safety in numbers and increased foraging efficiency. Defence against predators is particularly important in closed habitats like forests, where ambush predation is common and multiple eyes can provide a valuable early warning system. This has led to the development of many mixed-species feeding flocks, which are usually composed of small numbers of many species; these flocks provide safety in numbers but increase potential competition for resources. Costs of flocking include bullying of socially subordinate birds by more dominant birds and the reduction of feeding efficiency in certain cases.

Birds sometimes also form associations with non-avian species. Plunge-diving seabirds associate with dolphins and tuna, which push shoaling fish towards the surface. Hornbills have a mutualistic relationship with dwarf mongooses, in which they forage together and warn each other of nearby birds of prey and other predators.
The high metabolic rates of birds during the active part of the day is supplemented by rest at other times. Sleeping birds often use a type of sleep known as vigilant sleep, where periods of rest are interspersed with quick eye-opening "peeks", allowing them to be sensitive to disturbances and enable rapid escape from threats. Swifts are believed to be able to sleep in flight and radar observations suggest that they orient themselves to face the wind in their roosting flight. It has been suggested that there may be certain kinds of sleep which are possible even when in flight.

Some birds have also demonstrated the capacity to fall into slow-wave sleep one hemisphere of the brain at a time. The birds tend to exercise this ability depending upon its position relative to the outside of the flock. This may allow the eye opposite the sleeping hemisphere to remain vigilant for predators by viewing the outer margins of the flock. This adaptation is also known from marine mammals. Communal roosting is common because it lowers the loss of body heat and decreases the risks associated with predators. Roosting sites are often chosen with regard to thermoregulation and safety.

Many sleeping birds bend their heads over their backs and tuck their bills in their back feathers, although others place their beaks among their breast feathers. Many birds rest on one leg, while some may pull up their legs into their feathers, especially in cold weather. Perching birds have a tendon locking mechanism that helps them hold on to the perch when they are asleep. Many ground birds, such as quails and pheasants, roost in trees. A few parrots of the genus "Loriculus" roost hanging upside down. Some hummingbirds go into a nightly state of torpor accompanied with a reduction of their metabolic rates. This physiological adaptation shows in nearly a hundred other species, including owlet-nightjars, nightjars, and woodswallows. One species, the common poorwill, even enters a state of hibernation. Birds do not have sweat glands, but they may cool themselves by moving to shade, standing in water, panting, increasing their surface area, fluttering their throat or by using special behaviours like urohidrosis to cool themselves.

Ninety-five per cent of bird species are socially monogamous. These species pair for at least the length of the breeding season or—in some cases—for several years or until the death of one mate. Monogamy allows for both paternal care and biparental care, which is especially important for species in which females require males' assistance for successful brood-rearing. Among many socially monogamous species, extra-pair copulation (infidelity) is common. Such behaviour typically occurs between dominant males and females paired with subordinate males, but may also be the result of forced copulation in ducks and other anatids.

Female birds have sperm storage mechanisms that allow sperm from males to remain viable long after copulation, a hundred days in some species. Sperm from multiple males may compete through this mechanism. For females, possible benefits of extra-pair copulation include getting better genes for her offspring and insuring against the possibility of infertility in her mate. Males of species that engage in extra-pair copulations will closely guard their mates to ensure the parentage of the offspring that they raise.

Other mating systems, including polygyny, polyandry, polygamy, polygynandry, and promiscuity, also occur. Polygamous breeding systems arise when females are able to raise broods without the help of males. Some species may use more than one system depending on the circumstances.

Breeding usually involves some form of courtship display, typically performed by the male. Most displays are rather simple and involve some type of song. Some displays, however, are quite elaborate. Depending on the species, these may include wing or tail drumming, dancing, aerial flights, or communal lekking. Females are generally the ones that drive partner selection, although in the polyandrous phalaropes, this is reversed: plainer males choose brightly coloured females. Courtship feeding, billing and are commonly performed between partners, generally after the birds have paired and mated.

Homosexual behaviour has been observed in males or females in numerous species of birds, including copulation, pair-bonding, and joint parenting of chicks.

Many birds actively defend a territory from others of the same species during the breeding season; maintenance of territories protects the food source for their chicks. Species that are unable to defend feeding territories, such as seabirds and swifts, often breed in colonies instead; this is thought to offer protection from predators. Colonial breeders defend small nesting sites, and competition between and within species for nesting sites can be intense.

All birds lay amniotic eggs with hard shells made mostly of calcium carbonate. Hole and burrow nesting species tend to lay white or pale eggs, while open nesters lay camouflaged eggs. There are many exceptions to this pattern, however; the ground-nesting nightjars have pale eggs, and camouflage is instead provided by their plumage. Species that are victims of brood parasites have varying egg colours to improve the chances of spotting a parasite's egg, which forces female parasites to match their eggs to those of their hosts.

Bird eggs are usually laid in a nest. Most species create somewhat elaborate nests, which can be cups, domes, plates, beds scrapes, mounds, or burrows. Some bird nests, however, are extremely primitive; albatross nests are no more than a scrape on the ground. Most birds build nests in sheltered, hidden areas to avoid predation, but large or colonial birds—which are more capable of defence—may build more open nests. During nest construction, some species seek out plant matter from plants with parasite-reducing toxins to improve chick survival, and feathers are often used for nest insulation. Some bird species have no nests; the cliff-nesting common guillemot lays its eggs on bare rock, and male emperor penguins keep eggs between their body and feet. The absence of nests is especially prevalent in ground-nesting species where the newly hatched young are precocial.
Incubation, which optimises temperature for chick development, usually begins after the last egg has been laid. In monogamous species incubation duties are often shared, whereas in polygamous species one parent is wholly responsible for incubation. Warmth from parents passes to the eggs through brood patches, areas of bare skin on the abdomen or breast of the incubating birds. Incubation can be an energetically demanding process; adult albatrosses, for instance, lose as much as of body weight per day of incubation. The warmth for the incubation of the eggs of megapodes comes from the sun, decaying vegetation or volcanic sources. Incubation periods range from 10 days (in woodpeckers, cuckoos and passerine birds) to over 80 days (in albatrosses and kiwis).

The diversity of characteristics of birds is great, sometimes even in closely related species. Several avian characteristics are compared in the table below.

At the time of their hatching, chicks range in development from helpless to independent, depending on their species. Helpless chicks are termed "altricial", and tend to be born small, blind, immobile and naked; chicks that are mobile and feathered upon hatching are termed "precocial". Altricial chicks need help thermoregulating and must be brooded for longer than precocial chicks. The young of many bird species do not precisely fit into either the precocial or altricial category, having some aspects of each and thus fall somewhere on an "altricial-precocial spectrum". Chicks at neither extreme but favoring one or the other may be termed or .

The length and nature of parental care varies widely amongst different orders and species. At one extreme, parental care in megapodes ends at hatching; the newly hatched chick digs itself out of the nest mound without parental assistance and can fend for itself immediately. At the other extreme, many seabirds have extended periods of parental care, the longest being that of the great frigatebird, whose chicks take up to six months to fledge and are fed by the parents for up to an additional 14 months. The "chick guard stage" describes the period of breeding during which one of the adult birds is permanently present at the nest after chicks have hatched. The main purpose of the guard stage is to aid offspring to thermoregulate and protect them from predation.

In some species, both parents care for nestlings and fledglings; in others, such care is the responsibility of only one sex. In some species, other members of the same species—usually close relatives of the breeding pair, such as offspring from previous broods—will help with the raising of the young. Such alloparenting is particularly common among the Corvida, which includes such birds as the true crows, Australian magpie and fairy-wrens, but has been observed in species as different as the rifleman and red kite. Among most groups of animals, male parental care is rare. In birds, however, it is quite common—more so than in any other vertebrate class. Although territory and nest site defence, incubation, and chick feeding are often shared tasks, there is sometimes a division of labour in which one mate undertakes all or most of a particular duty.

The point at which chicks fledge varies dramatically. The chicks of the "Synthliboramphus" murrelets, like the ancient murrelet, leave the nest the night after they hatch, following their parents out to sea, where they are raised away from terrestrial predators. Some other species, such as ducks, move their chicks away from the nest at an early age. In most species, chicks leave the nest just before, or soon after, they are able to fly. The amount of parental care after fledging varies; albatross chicks leave the nest on their own and receive no further help, while other species continue some supplementary feeding after fledging. Chicks may also follow their parents during their first migration.

Brood parasitism, in which an egg-layer leaves her eggs with another individual's brood, is more common among birds than any other type of organism. After a parasitic bird lays her eggs in another bird's nest, they are often accepted and raised by the host at the expense of the host's own brood. Brood parasites may be either "obligate brood parasites", which must lay their eggs in the nests of other species because they are incapable of raising their own young, or "non-obligate brood parasites", which sometimes lay eggs in the nests of conspecifics to increase their reproductive output even though they could have raised their own young. One hundred bird species, including honeyguides, icterids, and ducks, are obligate parasites, though the most famous are the cuckoos. Some brood parasites are adapted to hatch before their host's young, which allows them to destroy the host's eggs by pushing them out of the nest or to kill the host's chicks; this ensures that all food brought to the nest will be fed to the parasitic chicks.

Birds have evolved a variety of mating behaviours, with the peacock tail being perhaps the most famous example of sexual selection and the Fisherian runaway. Commonly occurring sexual dimorphisms such as size and colour differences are energetically costly attributes that signal competitive breeding situations. Many types of avian sexual selection have been identified; intersexual selection, also known as female choice; and intrasexual competition, where individuals of the more abundant sex compete with each other for the privilege to mate. Sexually selected traits often evolve to become more pronounced in competitive breeding situations until the trait begins to limit the individual's fitness. Conflicts between an individual fitness and signalling adaptations ensure that sexually selected ornaments such as plumage coloration and courtship behaviour are "honest" traits. Signals must be costly to ensure that only good-quality individuals can present these exaggerated sexual ornaments and behaviours.

Inbreeding causes early death (inbreeding depression) in the zebra finch "Taeniopygia guttata". Embryo survival (that is, hatching success of fertile eggs) was significantly lower for sib-sib mating pairs than for unrelated pairs.

Darwin's finch "Geospiza scandens" experiences inbreeding depression (reduced survival of offspring) and the magnitude of this effect is influenced by environmental conditions such as low food availability.

Incestuous matings by the purple-crowned fairy wren "Malurus coronatus" result in severe fitness costs due to inbreeding depression (greater than 30% reduction in hatchability of eggs). Females paired with related males may undertake extra pair matings (see Promiscuity#Other animals for 90% frequency in avian species) that can reduce the negative effects of inbreeding. However, there are ecological and demographic constraints on extra pair matings. Nevertheless, 43% of broods produced by incestuously paired females contained extra pair young.

Inbreeding depression occurs in the great tit ("Parus major") when the offspring produced as a result of a mating between close relatives show reduced fitness. In natural populations of "Parus major", inbreeding is avoided by dispersal of individuals from their birthplace, which reduces the chance of mating with a close relative.

Southern pied babblers "Turdoides bicolor" appear to avoid inbreeding in two ways. The first is through dispersal, and the second is by avoiding familiar group members as mates. Although both males and females disperse locally, they move outside the range where genetically related individuals are likely to be encountered. Within their group, individuals only acquire breeding positions when the opposite-sex breeder is unrelated.

Cooperative breeding in birds typically occurs when offspring, usually males, delay dispersal from their natal group in order to remain with the family to help rear younger kin. Female offspring rarely stay at home, dispersing over distances that allow them to breed independently, or to join unrelated groups. In general, inbreeding is avoided because it leads to a reduction in progeny fitness (inbreeding depression) due largely to the homozygous expression of deleterious recessive alleles. Cross-fertilisation between unrelated individuals ordinarily leads to the masking of deleterious recessive alleles in progeny.

Birds occupy a wide range of ecological positions. While some birds are generalists, others are highly specialised in their habitat or food requirements. Even within a single habitat, such as a forest, the niches occupied by different species of birds vary, with some species feeding in the forest canopy, others beneath the canopy, and still others on the forest floor. Forest birds may be insectivores, frugivores, and nectarivores. Aquatic birds generally feed by fishing, plant eating, and piracy or kleptoparasitism. Birds of prey specialise in hunting mammals or other birds, while vultures are specialised scavengers. Avivores are animals that are specialised at preying on birds.

Some nectar-feeding birds are important pollinators, and many frugivores play a key role in seed dispersal. Plants and pollinating birds often coevolve, and in some cases a flower's primary pollinator is the only species capable of reaching its nectar.

Birds are often important to island ecology. Birds have frequently reached islands that mammals have not; on those islands, birds may fulfil ecological roles typically played by larger animals. For example, in New Zealand nine species of moa were important browsers, as are the kererū and kokako today. Today the plants of New Zealand retain the defensive adaptations evolved to protect them from the extinct moa. Nesting seabirds may also affect the ecology of islands and surrounding seas, principally through the concentration of large quantities of guano, which may enrich the local soil and the surrounding seas.

A wide variety of avian ecology field methods, including counts, nest monitoring, and capturing and marking, are used for researching avian ecology.

Since birds are highly visible and common animals, humans have had a relationship with them since the dawn of man. Sometimes, these relationships are mutualistic, like the cooperative honey-gathering among honeyguides and African peoples such as the Borana. Other times, they may be commensal, as when species such as the house sparrow have benefited from human activities. Several bird species have become commercially significant agricultural pests, and some pose an aviation hazard. Human activities can also be detrimental, and have threatened numerous bird species with extinction (hunting, avian lead poisoning, pesticides, roadkill, wind turbine kills and predation by pet cats and dogs are common causes of death for birds).

Birds can act as vectors for spreading diseases such as psittacosis, salmonellosis, campylobacteriosis, mycobacteriosis (avian tuberculosis), avian influenza (bird flu), giardiasis, and cryptosporidiosis over long distances. Some of these are zoonotic diseases that can also be transmitted to humans.

Domesticated birds raised for meat and eggs, called poultry, are the largest source of animal protein eaten by humans; in 2003, tons of poultry and tons of eggs were produced worldwide. Chickens account for much of human poultry consumption, though domesticated turkeys, ducks, and geese are also relatively common. Many species of birds are also hunted for meat. Bird hunting is primarily a recreational activity except in extremely undeveloped areas. The most important birds hunted in North and South America are waterfowl; other widely hunted birds include pheasants, wild turkeys, quail, doves, partridge, grouse, snipe, and woodcock. Muttonbirding is also popular in Australia and New Zealand. Although some hunting, such as that of muttonbirds, may be sustainable, hunting has led to the extinction or endangerment of dozens of species.

Other commercially valuable products from birds include feathers (especially the down of geese and ducks), which are used as insulation in clothing and bedding, and seabird faeces (guano), which is a valuable source of phosphorus and nitrogen. The War of the Pacific, sometimes called the Guano War, was fought in part over the control of guano deposits.

Birds have been domesticated by humans both as pets and for practical purposes. Colourful birds, such as parrots and mynas, are bred in captivity or kept as pets, a practice that has led to the illegal trafficking of some endangered species. Falcons and cormorants have long been used for hunting and fishing, respectively. Messenger pigeons, used since at least 1 AD, remained important as recently as World War II. Today, such activities are more common either as hobbies, for entertainment and tourism, or for sports such as pigeon racing.

Amateur bird enthusiasts (called birdwatchers, twitchers or, more commonly, birders) number in the millions. Many homeowners erect bird feeders near their homes to attract various species. Bird feeding has grown into a multimillion-dollar industry; for example, an estimated 75% of households in Britain provide food for birds at some point during the winter.

Birds play prominent and diverse roles in religion and mythology.
In religion, birds may serve as either messengers or priests and leaders for a deity, such as in the Cult of Makemake, in which the Tangata manu of Easter Island served as chiefs or as attendants, as in the case of Hugin and Munin, the two common ravens who whispered news into the ears of the Norse god Odin. In several civilisations of ancient Italy, particularly Etruscan and Roman religion, priests were involved in augury, or interpreting the words of birds while the "auspex" (from which the word "auspicious" is derived) watched their activities to foretell events.

They may also serve as religious symbols, as when Jonah (, dove) embodied the fright, passivity, mourning, and beauty traditionally associated with doves. Birds have themselves been deified, as in the case of the common peacock, which is perceived as Mother Earth by the Dravidians of India. In the ancient world, doves were used as symbols of the Mesopotamian goddess Inanna (later known as Ishtar), the Canaanite mother goddess Asherah, and the Greek goddess Aphrodite. In ancient Greece, Athena, the goddess of wisdom and patron deity of the city of Athens, had a little owl as her symbol. In religious images preserved from the Inca and Tiwanaku empires, birds are depicted in the process of transgressing boundaries between earthly and underground spiritual realms. Indigenous peoples of the central Andes maintain legends of birds passing to and from metaphysical worlds.

Birds have featured in culture and art since prehistoric times, when they were represented in early cave paintings. Some birds have been perceived as monsters, including the mythological Roc and the Māori's legendary "Pouākai", a giant bird capable of snatching humans. Birds were later used as symbols of power, as in the magnificent Peacock Throne of the Mughal and Persian emperors. With the advent of scientific interest in birds, many paintings of birds were commissioned for books.

Among the most famous of these bird artists was John James Audubon, whose paintings of North American birds were a great commercial success in Europe and who later lent his name to the National Audubon Society. Birds are also important figures in poetry; for example, Homer incorporated nightingales into his "Odyssey", and Catullus used a sparrow as an erotic symbol in his Catullus 2. The relationship between an albatross and a sailor is the central theme of Samuel Taylor Coleridge's "The Rime of the Ancient Mariner", which led to the use of the term as a metaphor for a 'burden'. Other English metaphors derive from birds; vulture funds and vulture investors, for instance, take their name from the scavenging vulture.

Perceptions of bird species vary across cultures. Owls are associated with bad luck, witchcraft, and death in parts of Africa, but are regarded as wise across much of Europe. Hoopoes were considered sacred in Ancient Egypt and symbols of virtue in Persia, but were thought of as thieves across much of Europe and harbingers of war in Scandinavia. In heraldry, birds, especially eagles, often appear in coats of arms.

In music, birdsong has influenced composers and musicians in several ways: they can be inspired by birdsong; they can intentionally imitate bird song in a composition, as Vivaldi, Messiaen, and Beethoven did, along with many later composers; they can incorporate recordings of birds into their works, as Ottorino Respighi first did; or like Beatrice Harrison and David Rothenberg, they can duet with birds.

Although human activities have allowed the expansion of a few species, such as the barn swallow and European starling, they have caused population decreases or extinction in many other species. Over a hundred bird species have gone extinct in historical times, although the most dramatic human-caused avian extinctions, eradicating an estimated 750–1800 species, occurred during the human colonisation of Melanesian, Polynesian, and Micronesian islands. Many bird populations are declining worldwide, with 1,227 species listed as threatened by BirdLife International and the IUCN in 2009.

The most commonly cited human threat to birds is habitat loss. Other threats include overhunting, accidental mortality due to collisions with buildings or vehicles, long-line fishing bycatch, pollution (including oil spills and pesticide use), competition and predation from nonnative invasive species, and climate change.

Governments and conservation groups work to protect birds, either by passing laws that preserve and restore bird habitat or by establishing captive populations for reintroductions. Such projects have produced some successes; one study estimated that conservation efforts saved 16 species of bird that would otherwise have gone extinct between 1994 and 2004, including the California condor and Norfolk parakeet.



</doc>
<doc id="13741523" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=13741523" title="Gastornithiformes">
Gastornithiformes

Gastornithiformes were an extinct order of giant flightless fowl with fossils found in North America, Eurasia, and possibly Australia. Members of Gastornithidae were long considered to be a part of the order Gruiformes. However, the traditional concept of Gruiformes has since been shown to be an unnatural grouping. Beginning in the late 1980s and the first phylogenetic analysis of gastornithid relationships, consensus began to grow that they were close relatives of the lineage that includes waterfowl and screamers, the Anseriformes. Recognizing the apparent close relationship between gastornis and waterfowl, some researchers even classify them within the anseriform group itself. Others restrict the name Anseriformes only to the crown group formed by all modern species, and label the larger group including extinct relatives of anseriformes in the clade Anserimorphae (which this article and related pages have adopted). While the order is generally considered to be monotypic, a 2017 paper concerning the evolution and phylogeny of giant fowl by Worthy and colleagues have found phylogenetic support in finding the mihirungs (Dromornithidae) to be the sister taxon to the gastornis. The mihirungs are also another family of giant flightless birds that have been classified as anserimorphs either as crown anseriforms closely related to the screamers (Anhimidae) or the sister taxon to Anseriformes. Worthy et al. (2017) incorporated several new taxa and character traits into existing matrices of Galloanserae resulted in several of their phylogenies to support this grouping. The authors did note the bootstrap support is weakly supported and one of their phylogenies even found gastornithiforms to be stem galliforms instead. These were also weakly supported. Below is a simplified phylogeny showing their one phylogeny supporting gastornithiforms as anserimorphs.


</doc>
<doc id="12306505" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=12306505" title="Water bird">
Water bird

The term water bird, alternatively, waterbird or aquatic bird (not to be confused with wading birds) is used to refer to birds that live on or around water. In some definitions, the term especially applied to birds in freshwater habitats, though others make no distinction from birds that inhabit marine environments. In addition, some water birds are more terrestrial or aquatic than others, and their adaptations will vary depending on their environment. These adaptations include webbed feet, bills and legs adapted to feed in water, and the ability to dive from the surface or the air to catch prey in water.
The term "aquatic bird" is sometimes also used in this context. A related term that has a narrower meaning is waterfowl. Some birds of prey, such as ospreys and sea eagles, take prey from water but are not considered water birds. The term waterbird is also used in the context of conservation to refer to any birds that inhabit or depend on bodies of water or wetland areas. Examples of this use include the Agreement on the Conservation of African-Eurasian Migratory Waterbirds (AEWA) and the Wallnau Waterbird Reserve.

Some examples of water birds are:



</doc>
<doc id="11489722" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=11489722" title="Vinkensport">
Vinkensport

Vinkensport (Dutch for "finch sport") is a competitive animal sport in which male common chaffinches are made to compete for the highest number of bird calls in an hour. Also called vinkenzetting ("finch sitting"), it is primarily active in the Dutch-speaking region of Flanders in Belgium.

Vinkensport traces its origins to competitions held by Flemish merchants in 1596, and is considered part of traditional Flemish culture. As of 2007, it was estimated that there are over 13,000 enthusiasts, called "vinkeniers" ("finchers"), breeding 10,000 birds every year. Animal rights activists oppose the sport.

In a contest, a row of small cages, each housing a single male finch, is lined up approximately six feet apart along a street. The proximity of the cages increases the number of calls, as the birds sing for mates and to establish territory. A timekeeper begins and ends the contest with a red flag. Every time a bird sings a correct terminating flourish to their call—most often transcribed as "susk-e-wiet"—a tally mark in chalk is made on a long wooden stick. The bird singing its song the most times during one hour wins the contest. Champion finches regularly sing hundreds of calls in contests.

The earliest known records of vinkeniers are from 1596 (with some sources advocating a slightly earlier 1593 origin) with Flemish merchants competing. By the late nineteenth century, vinkenzetting's popularity had diminished significantly, but it saw a resurgence after the First World War. As of 2007, it was estimated that there are over 13,000 "vinkeniers" breeding 10,000 birds every year. However, the popularity of this folk sport is waning in the 21st century. There is also a museum of the sport ("Nationaal Volkssportmuseum Vinkensport") in the village of Hulste in the Harelbeke municipality of Belgium.

Vinkeniers use a variety of methods to increase the number of calls in their birds. Techniques to develop singing aptitude include selective breeding programs, high-protein diets, and stimulating them with music and recordings of bird song. As wild finches generally begin singing during the spring mating season, keepers may also use artificial lights placed in aviaries to encourage increased song.

Some vinkeniers claim that finches from the different regions of Belgium sing in different dialects; with birds from the Dutch-speaking Flanders singing "in Dutch" and those from the French-speaking Wallonia singing undesirably "in French". The use of "Dutch" and "Walloon" to describe these two supposed types of finches has been suggested to refer to a simple difference in calling not literally linked to either the Flemish or Walloon communities of Belgium, and some linguists even suggest that "Walloon" simply means "foreign". While minute regional differences (a.k.a. dialects) in song have been observed in the chaffinch (also within Belgium), the differences have only been reliably distinguishable by the use of sonograms. Taxonomically, there are no officially recognized subspecies of chaffinch within Belgium.

Speed-singing contests for finches are also a common event in Guyana, Trinidad, Suriname and Brazil. The male finches are placed in cages on poles about one foot apart. The first finch to reach 50 songs wins. The illegal importation of these finches from immigrants of these countries has challenged authorities in New York City.

As with other sports, vinkensport has had its cheating scandals, as well as accusations of artificial enhancement. One finch sang a record 1,278 susk-e-weits in one hour, and the owner was later accused of doping the bird with testosterone. After one contestant sang exactly the same number of calls in three rounds, the box was opened and a mini CD player was discovered within.

Throughout much of its history, certain attributes of the sport have garnered criticism. Early proponents of the sport would blind birds with hot needles in order to reduce visual distractions. Thomas Hardy—the celebrated English author and poet who was also an antivivisectionist and member of the RSPCA—is said to have written his poem "The Blinded Bird" as a protest against the practice. In 1920, a campaign by blind World War I veterans banned the practice, and today the birds are kept in small wooden boxes that let air in but keep distractions out.

Modern animal rights activists, such as those from the Flemish Bird Protection Society, accuse trainers of "brainwashing" birds into singing more than is natural or healthy by playing looped recordings of finch calls, and that caging birds in the intentionally small and dark contest boxes is cruel. The finch is a popular aviary bird in many countries and it is forbidden in the European Union to catch birds in the wild, despite vinkeniers purporting that wild birds sing better than captive ones. Though chaffinch populations are currently not considered to be threatened, a 2002 court case at the Belgian Constitutional Court upheld a 1979 EU law banning the capture of wild finches.




</doc>
<doc id="23812738" url="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=23812738" title="Outline of birds">
Outline of birds

The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to birds:

Birds (class Aves) – winged, bipedal, endothermic (warm-blooded), egg-laying, vertebrate animals. There are around 10,000 living species, making them the most varied of tetrapod vertebrates. They inhabit ecosystems across the globe, from the Arctic to the Antarctic. Extant birds range in size from the bee hummingbird to the ostrich.

A bird can be described as all of the following:


Bird

Bird anatomy

Bird behavior



Aviculture




List of ornithologists





</doc>
